No. 28 Ann Street, N.Y. </td> </tr> </table> The Republican Party also split over the issue of reelecting Lincoln. Those who found him timid and indecisive, and favored extending full rights to African Americans, as well as completely refashioning the South after its defeat, earned the name Radicals. A moderate faction of Republicans opposed the Radicals. For his part, Lincoln did not align himself with either group. The tide of the election campaign turned in favor of Lincoln, however, in the fall of 1864. Above all else, Union victories, including the fall of Atlanta in September and General Philip Sheridan’s successes in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia, bolstered Lincoln’s popularity and his reelection bid. In November 1864, despite earlier forecasts to the contrary, Lincoln was reelected. Lincoln won all but three states—New Jersey and the border states of Delaware and Kentucky. To the chagrin of his opponent, McClellan, even Union army troops voted overwhelmingly for the incumbent President. # THE WAR ENDS By the spring of 1865, it had become clear to both sides that the Confederacy could not last much longer. Most of its major cities, ports, and industrial centers—Atlanta, Savannah, Charleston, Columbia, Mobile, New Orleans, and Memphis—had been captured. In April 1865, Lee had abandoned both Petersburg and Richmond. --- His goal in doing so was to unite his depleted army with Confederate forces commanded by General Johnston. Grant effectively cut him off. On April 9, 1865, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox Court House in Virginia (Figure 15.19). By that time, he had fewer than 35,000 soldiers, while Grant had some 100,000. Meanwhile, Sherman’s army proceeded to North Carolina, where General Johnston surrendered on April 26, 1865. The Civil War had come to an end. The war had cost the lives of more than 600,000 soldiers. Many more had been wounded. Thousands of women were left widowed. Children were left without fathers, and many parents were deprived of a source of support in their old age. In some areas, where local volunteer units had marched off to battle, never to return, an entire generation of young women was left without marriage partners. Millions of dollars’ worth of property had been destroyed, and towns and cities were laid to waste. With the conflict finally over, the very difficult work of reconciling North and South and reestablishing the United States lay ahead. [The image shows a painting of Confederate general Robert E. Lee (seated at the left) surrendering to Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox Courthouse. Several other men in military uniforms stand and sit around them.] **FIGURE 15.19** Vastly outnumbered by the Union army, the Confederate general Robert E. Lee (seated at the left) surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox Courthouse. (credit: “Alaskan Dude”/Wikimedia Commons) --- # Key Terms **Army of the Potomac** the Union fighting force operating outside Washington, DC **Army of the West** the Union fighting force operating in Kentucky, Tennessee, and the Mississippi River Valley **Confederacy** the new nation formed by the seceding southern states, also known as the Confederate States of America (CSA) **contrabands** enslaved people who escaped to the Union army’s lines **Copperheads** Democrats who opposed Lincoln in the 1864 election **Crittenden Compromise** a compromise, suggested by Kentucky senator John Crittenden, that would restore the 36°30′ line from the Missouri Compromise and extend it to the Pacific Ocean, allowing slavery to expand into the southwestern territories **Emancipation Proclamation** signed on January 1, 1863, the document with which President Lincoln transformed the Civil War into a struggle to end slavery **Fort Sumter** a fort in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, where the Union garrison came under siege by Confederate forces in an attack on April 12, 1861, beginning the Civil War **general in chief** the commander of army land forces **Gettysburg Address** a speech by Abraham Lincoln dedicating the military cemetery at Gettysburg on November 19, 1863 **greenbacks** paper money the United States began to issue during the Civil War **habeas corpus** the right of those arrested to be brought before a judge or court to determine whether there is cause to hold the prisoner **Sherman’s March to the Sea** the scorched-earth campaign employed in Georgia by Union general William Tecumseh Sherman **total war** a state of war in which the government makes no distinction between military and civilian targets, and mobilizes all resources, extending its reach into all areas of citizens’ lives # Summary ## 15.1 The Origins and Outbreak of the Civil War The election of Abraham Lincoln to the presidency in 1860 proved to be a watershed event. While it did not cause the Civil War, it was the culmination of increasing tensions between the proslavery South and the antislavery North. Before Lincoln had even taken office, seven Deep South states had seceded from the Union to form the CSA, dedicated to maintaining racial slavery and White supremacy. Last-minute efforts to reach a compromise, such as the proposal by Senator Crittenden and the Corwin amendment, went nowhere. The time for compromise had come to an end. With the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter, the Civil War began. ## 15.2 Early Mobilization and War Many in both the North and the South believed that a short, decisive confrontation in 1861 would settle the question of the Confederacy. These expectations did not match reality, however, and the war dragged on into a second year. Both sides mobilized, with advantages and disadvantages on each side that led to a rough equilibrium. The losses of battles at Manassas and Fredericksburg, Virginia, kept the North from achieving the speedy victory its generals had hoped for, but the Union did make gains and continued to press forward. While they could not capture the Southern capital of Richmond, they were victorious in the Battle of Shiloh and captured New Orleans and Memphis. Thus, the Confederates lost major ground on the western front. ## 15.3 1863: The Changing Nature of the War The year 1863 proved decisive in the Civil War for two major reasons. First, the Union transformed the purpose of the struggle from restoring the Union to ending slavery. While Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation actually succeeded in freeing few of the enslaved, it made freedom for African Americans a cause of the Union. Second, the tide increasingly turned against the Confederacy. The success of the Vicksburg Campaign had given the Union control of the Mississippi River, and Lee’s defeat at Gettysburg had ended the --- ## 15.4 The Union Triumphant Having failed to win the support it expected from either Great Britain or France, the Confederacy faced a long war with limited resources and no allies. Lincoln won reelection in 1864, and continued to pursue the Union campaign, not only in the east and west, but also with a drive into the South under the leadership of General Sherman, whose March to the Sea through Georgia destroyed everything in its path. Cut off and outnumbered, Confederate general Lee surrendered to Union general Grant on April 9 at Appomattox Court House in Virginia. Within days of Lee’s surrender, Confederate troops had lay down their arms, and the devastating war came to a close. ### Review Questions 1. Which of the following does *not* represent a goal of the Confederate States of America? A. to protect slavery from any effort to abolish it B. to protect the domestic slave trade C. to ensure that slavery would be allowed to spread into western territories D. to ensure that the international slave trade would be allowed to continue 2. Which was *not* a provision of the Crittenden Compromise? A. that the Five Civilized Tribes would be admitted into the Confederacy B. that the 36°30′ line from the Missouri Compromise would be restored and extended C. that Congress would be prohibited from abolishing slavery where it already existed D. that the interstate slave trade would be allowed to continue 3. Why did the states of the Deep South secede from the Union sooner than the states of the Upper South and the border states? 4. All the following were strengths of the Union *except* ________. A. a large population B. substantial industry C. an extensive railroad D. the ability to fight defensively, rather than offensively 5. All the following were strengths of the Confederacy *except* ________. A. the ability to wage a defensive war B. shorter supply lines C. the resources of the Upper South states D. a strong navy 6. What military successes and defeats did the Union experience in 1862? 7. Which of the following did the North *not* do to mobilize for war? A. institute a military draft B. form a military alliance with Great Britain C. print paper money D. pass the Homestead Act 8. Why is 1863 considered a turning point in the Civil War? 9. Which of the following is *not* a reason why many people opposed Lincoln’s reelection in 1864? A. He appeared to have overstepped his authority by suspending the writ of habeas corpus. --- B. He issued the Emancipation Proclamation. C. He had replaced General George B. McClellan. D. He was seen as a power-hungry dictator. 10. What was General Sherman’s objective on his March to the Sea? A. to destroy military and civilian resources wherever possible B. to free Black prisoners of war C. to join his army to that of General Grant D. to capture General Robert E. Lee **Critical Thinking Questions** 11. Could the differences between the North and South have been worked out in late 1860 and 1861? Could war have been avoided? Provide evidence to support your answer. 12. Why did the North prevail in the Civil War? What might have turned the tide of the war *against* the North? 13. If you were in charge of the Confederate war effort, what strategy or strategies would you have pursued? Conversely, if you had to devise the Union strategy, what would you propose? How does your answer depend on your knowledge of how the war actually played out? 14. What do you believe to be the enduring qualities of the Gettysburg Address? Why has this two-minute speech so endured? 15. What role did women and African Americans play in the war? --- # The Era of Reconstruction, 1865–1877 **16** [The image shows a political cartoon by Thomas Nast, which appeared in *Harper’s Weekly* in October 1874. The “White League” shakes hands with the Ku Klux Klan over a shield that shows a couple weeping over a baby. In the background, a schoolhouse burns, and a lynched freedman is shown hanging from a tree. Above the shield, which is labeled “Worse than Slavery,” the text reads, “The Union as It Was: This Is a White Man’s Government.”] **FIGURE 16.1** In this political cartoon by Thomas Nast, which appeared in *Harper’s Weekly* in October 1874, the “White League” shakes hands with the Ku Klux Klan over a shield that shows a couple weeping over a baby. In the background, a schoolhouse burns, and a lynched freedman is shown hanging from a tree. Above the shield, which is labeled “Worse than Slavery,” the text reads, “The Union as It Was: This Is a White Man’s Government.” ## CHAPTER OUTLINE * **16.1** Restoring the Union * **16.2** Congress and the Remaking of the South, 1865–1866 * **16.3** Radical Reconstruction, 1867–1872 * **16.4** The Collapse of Reconstruction **INTRODUCTION** Few times in U.S. history have been as turbulent and transformative as the Civil War and the twelve years that followed. Between 1865 and 1877, one president was murdered and another impeached. The Constitution underwent major revision with the addition of three amendments. The effort to impose Union control and create equality in the defeated South ignited a fierce backlash as various terrorist and vigilante organizations, most notably the Ku Klux Klan, battled to maintain a pre–Civil War society in which White people held complete power. These groups unleashed a wave of violence, including lynching and arson, aimed at freed Black people and their White supporters. Historians refer to this era as Reconstruction, when an effort to remake the South faltered and ultimately failed. The above political cartoon (Figure 16.1) expresses the anguish many Americans felt in the decade after the Civil War. The South, which had experienced catastrophic losses during the conflict, was reduced to political dependence and economic destitution. This humiliating condition led many southern White people to vigorously contest Union efforts to transform the South’s racial, economic, and social landscape. Supporters of --- equality grew increasingly dismayed at Reconstruction’s failure to undo the old system, which further compounded the staggering regional and racial inequalities in the United States. # 16.1 Restoring the Union ### LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Describe Lincoln’s plan to restore the Union at the end of the Civil War * Discuss the tenets of Radical Republicanism * Analyze the success or failure of the Thirteenth Amendment <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="9" style="text-align:center;">FIGURE 16.2</th> </tr> <tr> <th>1863<br>Abraham Lincoln unveils “ten percent plan”</th> <th>1865<br>John Wilkes Booth assassinates Lincoln; Congress establishes Freedmen’s Bureau; Thirteenth Amendment ratified</th> <th>1866<br>Congress passes Civil Rights Act</th> <th>1867<br><i>Radical Republicans pass Military Reconstruction Act</i></th> <th>1868<br>Congress moves to impeach Andrew Johnson; Fourteenth Amendment ratified</th> <th>1870<br>Fifteenth Amendment ratified</th> <th>1876<br>Rutherford B. Hayes defeats Samuel Tilden in contested presidential election</th> <th>1877<br>Compromise of 1877 ends Reconstruction</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td colspan="9" style="text-align:center;"> <p>The end of the Civil War saw the beginning of the <b>Reconstruction</b> era, when former rebel Southern states were integrated back into the Union. President Lincoln moved quickly to achieve the war’s ultimate goal: reunification of the country. He proposed a generous and non-punitive plan to return the former Confederate states speedily to the United States, but some Republicans in Congress protested, considering the president’s plan too lenient to the rebel states that had torn the country apart. The greatest flaw of Lincoln’s plan, according to this view, was that it appeared to forgive traitors instead of guaranteeing civil rights to formerly enslaved people. President Lincoln oversaw the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment abolishing slavery, but he did not live to see its ratification.</p> </td> </tr> </tbody> </table> ## THE PRESIDENT’S PLAN From the outset of the rebellion in 1861, Lincoln’s overriding goal had been to bring the Southern states quickly back into the fold in order to restore the Union (Figure 16.3). In early December 1863, the president began the process of reunification by unveiling a three-part proposal known as the **ten percent plan** that outlined how the states would return. The ten percent plan gave a general pardon to all Southerners except high-ranking Confederate government and military leaders; required 10 percent of the 1860 voting population in the former rebel states to take a binding oath of future allegiance to the United States and the emancipation of the enslaved; and declared that once those voters took those oaths, the restored Confederate states would draft new state constitutions. --- FIGURE 16.3 Thomas Le Mere took this albumen silver print (a) of Abraham Lincoln in April 1863. Le Mere thought a standing pose of Lincoln would be popular. In this political cartoon from 1865 (b), Lincoln and his vice president, Andrew Johnson, endeavor to sew together the torn pieces of the Union. Lincoln hoped that the leniency of the plan—90 percent of the 1860 voters did not have to swear allegiance to the Union or to emancipation—would bring about a quick and long-anticipated resolution and make emancipation more acceptable everywhere. This approach appealed to some in the moderate wing of the Republican Party, which wanted to put the nation on a speedy course toward reconciliation. However, the proposal instantly drew fire from a larger faction of Republicans in Congress who did not want to deal moderately with the South. These members of Congress, known as **Radical Republicans**, wanted to remake the South and punish the rebels. Radical Republicans insisted on harsh terms for the defeated Confederacy and protection for formerly enslaved people, going far beyond what the president proposed. In February 1864, two of the Radical Republicans, Ohio senator Benjamin Wade and Maryland representative Henry Winter Davis, answered Lincoln with a proposal of their own. Among other stipulations, the Wade-Davis Bill called for a majority of voters and government officials in Confederate states to take an oath, called the **Ironclad Oath**, swearing that they had never supported the Confederacy or made war against the United States. Those who could not or would not take the oath would be unable to take part in the future political life of the South. Congress assented to the Wade-Davis Bill, and it went to Lincoln for his signature. The president refused to sign, using the pocket veto (that is, taking no action) to kill the bill. Lincoln understood that no Southern state would have met the criteria of the Wade-Davis Bill, and its passage would simply have delayed the reconstruction of the South. ### THE THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT Despite the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation, the legal status of enslaved people and the institution of slavery remained unresolved. The news of the Proclamation wouldn’t even reach the entire country for another two and a half years. To deal with the remaining uncertainties, the Republican Party made the abolition of slavery a top priority by including the issue in its 1864 party platform. The platform read: “That as slavery was the cause, and now constitutes the strength of this Rebellion, and as it must be, always and everywhere, hostile to the principles of Republican Government, justice and the National safety demand its utter and complete extirpation from the soil of the Republic; and that, while we uphold and maintain the acts and proclamations by which the Government, in its own defense, has aimed a deathblow at this gigantic evil, we are in favor, --- furthermore, of such an amendment to the Constitution, to be made by the people in conformity with its provisions, as shall terminate and forever prohibit the existence of Slavery within the limits of the jurisdiction of the United States.” The platform left no doubt about the intention to abolish slavery. The president, along with the Radical Republicans, made good on this campaign promise in 1864 and 1865. A proposed constitutional amendment passed the Senate in April 1864, and the House of Representatives concurred in January 1865. The amendment then made its way to the states, where it swiftly gained the necessary support, including in the South. In December 1865, the Thirteenth Amendment was officially ratified and added to the Constitution. The first amendment added to the Constitution since 1804, it overturned a centuries-old practice by permanently abolishing slavery. **CLICK AND EXPLORE** Explore a comprehensive collection of documents, images, and ephemera related to [Abraham Lincoln (https://openstax.org/l/15Lincoln)] on the Library of Congress website. President Lincoln never saw the final ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment. On April 14, 1865, the Confederate supporter and well-known actor John Wilkes Booth shot Lincoln while he was attending a play, *Our American Cousin*, at Ford’s Theater in Washington. The president died the next day (Figure 16.4). Booth had steadfastly defended the Confederacy and White supremacy, and his act was part of a larger conspiracy to eliminate the heads of the Union government and keep the Confederate fight going. One of Booth’s associates stabbed and wounded Secretary of State William Seward the night of the assassination. Another associate abandoned the planned assassination of Vice President Andrew Johnson at the last moment. Although Booth initially escaped capture, Union troops shot and killed him on April 26, 1865, in a Virginia barn. Eight other conspirators were convicted by a military tribunal for participating in the conspiracy, and four were hanged. Lincoln’s death earned him immediate martyrdom, and hysteria spread throughout the North. To many Northerners, the assassination suggested an even greater conspiracy than what was revealed, masterminded by the unrepentant leaders of the defeated Confederacy. Militant Republicans would use and exploit this fear relentlessly in the ensuing months. [The image shows a painting titled *The Assassination of President Lincoln* (1865), by Currier and Ives. It depicts John Wilkes Booth shooting Lincoln in the back of the head as Lincoln sits in the theater box with his wife, Mary Todd Lincoln, and their guests, Major Henry R. Rathbone and Clara Harris.]