by Francis Scott Key. The United States was unequivocally separate from Britain and could now turn as never before to expansion in the West. ### Review Questions 1. Which of the following is *not* one of the rights the Bill of Rights guarantees? A. the right to freedom of speech B. the right to an education C. the right to bear arms D. the right to a trial by jury 2. Which of Alexander Hamilton’s financial policies and programs seemed to benefit speculators at the expense of poor soldiers? A. the creation of a national bank B. the public credit plan C. the tax on whiskey D. the “Report on Manufactures” 3. What were the fundamental differences between the Federalist and Democratic-Republican visions? 4. Which of the following was *not* true of Jay’s Treaty of 1794? A. It gave the United States land rights in the West Indies. B. It gave American ships the right to trade in the West Indies. C. It hardened differences between the political parties of the United States. D. It stipulated that U.S. citizens would repay their debts from the Revolutionary War. 5. What was the primary complaint of the rebels in the Whiskey Rebellion? A. the ban on alcohol B. the lack of political representation for farmers C. the need to fight Native Americans for more land D. the tax on whiskey and rum 6. How did the French Revolution in the early 1790s influence the evolution of the American political --- 7. What was the primary issue of Adams’s presidency? A. war with Spain B. relations with the native population C. infighting within the Federalist Party D. relations with France 8. Which of the following events is *not* an example of partisan acrimony? A. the jailing of Matthew Lyon B. the XYZ affair C. the *Marbury v. Madison* case D. the Hamilton-Burr duel 9. What was the importance of the Louisiana Purchase? A. It gave the United States control of the port of New Orleans for trade. B. It opened up the possibility of quick trade routes to Asia. C. It gave the United States political leverage against the Spanish. D. It provided Napoleon with an impetus to restore France’s empire. 10. How did U.S. relations with France influence events at the end of the eighteenth century? 11. Why do historians refer to the election of Thomas Jefferson as the Revolution of 1800? 12. What prompted the Embargo of 1807? A. British soldiers burned the U.S. capitol. B. The British supplied arms to Native fighters. C. The British navy captured American ships on the high seas and impressed their sailors into service for the British. D. The British hadn’t abandoned their posts in the Northwest Territory as required by Jay’s Treaty. 13. What event inspired “The Star-Spangled Banner”? A. Betsy Ross sewing the first American flag raised during a time of war B. the British bombardment of Baltimore C. the British burning of Washington, DC D. the naval battle between the *Leopard* and the *Chesapeake* **Critical Thinking Questions** 14. Describe Alexander Hamilton’s plans to address the nation’s financial woes. Which aspects proved most controversial, and why? What elements of the foundation Hamilton laid can still be found in the system today? 15. Describe the growth of the first party system in the United States. How did these parties come to develop? How did they define themselves, both independently and in opposition to one another? Where did they find themselves in agreement? 16. What led to the passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts? What made them so controversial? 17. What was the most significant impact of the War of 1812? 18. In what ways did the events of this era pose challenges to the U.S. Constitution? What constitutional issues were raised, and how were they addressed? --- 220 8 • Critical Thinking Questions Access for free at openstax.org --- # Industrial Transformation in the North, 1800–1850 **FIGURE 9.1** *Five Points* (1827), by George Catlin, depicts the infamous Five Points neighborhood of New York City, so called because it was centered at the intersection of five streets. Five Points was home to a polyglot mix of recent immigrants, formerly enslaved people, and other members of the working class. ## CHAPTER OUTLINE **9.1** Early Industrialization in the Northeast **9.2** A Vibrant Capitalist Republic **9.3** On the Move: The Transportation Revolution **9.4** A New Social Order: Class Divisions ### INTRODUCTION By the 1830s, the United States had developed a thriving industrial and commercial sector in the Northeast. Farmers embraced regional and distant markets as the primary destination for their products. Artisans witnessed the methodical division of the labor process in factories. Wage labor became an increasingly common experience. These industrial and market revolutions, combined with advances in transportation, transformed the economic and social landscape. Americans could now quickly produce larger amounts of goods for a nationwide, and sometimes an international, market and rely less on foreign imports than in colonial times. As American economic life shifted rapidly and modes of production changed, new class divisions emerged and solidified, resulting in previously unknown economic and social inequalities. This image of the Five Points district in New York City captures the turbulence of the time (Figure 9.1). Five Points began as a settlement for freed formerly enslaved people, but it soon became a crowded urban world of American day laborers and low-wage workers who lived a precarious existence that the economic benefits of the new economy largely bypassed. An influx of immigrant workers swelled and diversified an already crowded urban population. By --- the 1830s, the area had become a slum, home to widespread poverty, crime, and disease. Advances in industrialization and the market revolution came at a human price. # 9.1 Early Industrialization in the Northeast **LEARNING OBJECTIVES** By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain the role of the putting-out system in the rise of industrialization * Understand industrialization’s impact on the nature of production and work * Describe the effect of industrialization on consumption * Identify the goals of workers’ organizations like the Working Men’s Party <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">Timeline of Early Industrialization</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td><b>1807</b><br>Robert Fulton builds first successful steamboat</td> <td><b>1813</b><br><i>Francis Cabot Lowell founds Boston Manufacturing Company</i></td> <td><b>1819</b><br><i>Bank panic leads to depression</i></td> <td><b>1825</b><br><i>Erie Canal opens</i></td> <td><b>1831</b><br><i>Cyrus McCormick invents mechanical reaper; Mohawk and Hudson Railroad begins service</i></td> <td><b>1838</b><br><i>Samuel Morse first demonstrates the telegraph</i></td> <td><b>1841</b><br><i>P. T. Barnum’s American Museum opens in New York City</i></td> </tr> </tbody> </table> **FIGURE 9.2** (credit “1807 photo”: Project Gutenberg Archives) Northern industrialization expanded rapidly following the War of 1812. Industrialized manufacturing began in New England, where wealthy merchants built water-powered textile mills (and mill towns to support them) along the rivers of the Northeast. These mills introduced new modes of production centralized within the confines of the mill itself. As never before, production relied on mechanized sources with water power, and later steam, to provide the force necessary to drive machines. In addition to the mechanization and centralization of work in the mills, specialized, repetitive tasks assigned to wage laborers replaced earlier modes of handicraft production done by artisans at home. The operations of these mills irrevocably changed the nature of work by deskilling tasks, breaking down the process of production to its most basic, elemental parts. In return for their labor, the workers, who at first were young women from rural New England farming families, received wages. From its origin in New England, manufacturing soon spread to other regions of the United States. ## FROM ARTISANS TO WAGE WORKERS During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, **artisans**—skilled, experienced craft workers—produced goods by hand. The production of shoes provides a good example. In colonial times, people bought their shoes from master shoemakers, who achieved their status by living and working as apprentices under the rule of an older master artisan. An apprenticeship would be followed by work as a journeyman (a skilled worker without his own shop). After sufficient time as a journeyman, a shoemaker could at last set up his own shop as a master artisan. People came to the shop, usually attached to the back of the master artisan’s house, and there the shoemaker measured their feet in order to cut and stitch together an individualized product for each customer. In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century, merchants in the Northeast and elsewhere turned their attention as never before to the benefits of using unskilled wage labor to make a greater profit by reducing --- labor costs. They used the **putting-out system**, which the British had employed at the beginning of their own Industrial Revolution, whereby they hired farming families to perform specific tasks in the production process for a set wage. In the case of shoes, for instance, American merchants hired one group of workers to cut soles into standardized sizes. A different group of families cut pieces of leather for the uppers, while still another was employed to stitch the standardized parts together. This process proved attractive because it whittled production costs. The families who participated in the putting-out system were not skilled artisans. They had not spent years learning and perfecting their craft and did not have ambitious journeymen to pay. Therefore, they could not demand—and did not receive—high wages. Most of the year they tended fields and orchards, ate the food that they produced, and sold the surplus. Putting-out work proved a welcome source of extra income for New England farm families who saw their profits dwindle from new competition from midwestern farms with higher-yield lands. Much of this part-time production was done under contract to merchants. Some farming families engaged in shoemaking (or shoe assemblage), as noted above. Many made brooms, plaited hats from straw or palm leaves (which merchants imported from Cuba and the West Indies), crafted furniture, made pottery, or wove baskets. Some, especially those who lived in Connecticut, made parts for clocks. The most common part-time occupation, however, was the manufacture of textiles. Farm women spun woolen thread and wove fabric. They also wove blankets, made rugs, and knit stockings. All this manufacturing took place on the farm, giving farmers and their wives control over the timing and pace of their labor. Their domestic productivity increased the quantity of goods available for sale in country towns and nearby cities. ### THE RISE OF MANUFACTURING In the late 1790s and early 1800s, Great Britain boasted the most advanced textile mills and machines in the world, and the United States continued to rely on Great Britain for finished goods. Great Britain hoped to maintain its economic advantage over its former colonies in North America. So, in an effort to prevent the knowledge of advanced manufacturing from leaving the Empire, the British banned the emigration of mechanics, skilled workers who knew how to build and repair the latest textile machines. Some skilled British mechanics, including Samuel Slater, managed to travel to the United States in the hopes of profiting from their knowledge and experience with advanced textile manufacturing. Slater (Figure 9.3) understood the workings of the latest water-powered textile mills, which British industrialist Richard Arkwright had pioneered. In the 1790s in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, Slater convinced several American merchants, including the wealthy Providence industrialist Moses Brown, to finance and build a water-powered cotton mill based on the British models. Slater’s knowledge of both technology and mill organization made him the founder of the first truly successful cotton mill in the United States. <table> <thead> <tr> <th>(a)</th> <th>(b)</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td>Portrait of Samuel Slater, a British migrant who brought plans for English textile mills to the United States.</td> <td>Illustration of the nation’s first successful water-powered mill in Pawtucket, Rhode Island.</td> </tr> </tbody> </table> **FIGURE 9.3** Samuel Slater (a) was a British migrant who brought plans for English textile mills to the United States and built the nation’s first successful water-powered mill in Pawtucket, Rhode Island (b). --- The success of Slater and his partners Smith Brown and William Almy, relatives of Moses Brown, inspired others to build additional mills in Rhode Island and Massachusetts. By 1807, thirteen more mills had been established. President Jefferson’s embargo on British manufactured goods from late 1807 to early 1809 (discussed in a previous chapter) spurred more New England merchants to invest in industrial enterprises. By 1812, seventy-eight new textile mills had been built in rural New England towns. More than half turned out woolen goods, while the rest produced cotton cloth. Slater’s mills and those built in imitation of his were fairly small, employing only seventy people on average. Workers were organized the way that they had been in English factories, in family units. Under the “Rhode Island system,” families were hired. The father was placed in charge of the family unit, and he directed the labor of his wife and children. Instead of being paid in cash, the father was given “credit” equal to the extent of his family’s labor that could be redeemed in the form of rent (of company-owned housing) or goods from the company-owned store. The Embargo of 1807 and the War of 1812 played a pivotal role in spurring industrial development in the United States. Jefferson’s embargo prevented American merchants from engaging in the Atlantic trade, severely cutting into their profits. The War of 1812 further compounded the financial woes of American merchants. The acute economic problems led some New England merchants, including Francis Cabot Lowell, to cast their gaze on manufacturing. Lowell had toured English mills during a stay in Great Britain. He returned to Massachusetts having memorized the designs for the advanced textile machines he had seen in his travels, especially the power loom, which replaced individual hand weavers. Lowell convinced other wealthy merchant families to invest in the creation of new mill towns. In 1813, Lowell and these wealthy investors, known as the Boston Associates, created the Boston Manufacturing Company. Together they raised $400,000 and, in 1814, established a textile mill in Waltham and a second one in the same town shortly thereafter (Figure 9.4). **FIGURE 9.4** The Boston Manufacturing Company, shown in this engraving made in 1813–1816, was headquartered in Waltham, Massachusetts. The company started the northeastern textile industry by building water-powered textile mills along suitable rivers and developing mill towns around them. At Waltham, cotton was carded and drawn into coarse strands of cotton fibers called rovings. The rovings were then spun into yarn, and the yarn woven into cotton cloth. Yarn no longer had to be put out to farm families for further processing. All the work was now performed at a central location—the factory. The work in Lowell’s mills was both mechanized and specialized. Specialization meant the work was broken down into specific tasks, and workers repeatedly did the one task assigned to them in the course of a day. As machines took over labor from humans and people increasingly found themselves confined to the same repetitive step, the process of **deskilling** began. --- The Boston Associates’ mills, which each employed hundreds of workers, were located in company towns, where the factories and worker housing were owned by a single company. This gave the owners and their agents control over their workers. The most famous of these company towns was Lowell, Massachusetts. The new town was built on land the Boston Associates purchased in 1821 from the village of East Chelmsford at the falls of the Merrimack River, north of Boston. The mill buildings themselves were constructed of red brick with large windows to let in light. Company-owned boarding houses to shelter employees were constructed near the mills. The mill owners planted flowers and trees to maintain the appearance of a rural New England town and to forestall arguments, made by many, that factory work was unnatural and unwholesome. In contrast to many smaller mills, the Boston Associates’ enterprises avoided the Rhode Island system, preferring individual workers to families. These employees were not difficult to find. The competition New England farmers faced from farmers now settling in the West, and the growing scarcity of land in population-dense New England, had important implications for farmers’ children. Realizing their chances of inheriting a large farm or receiving a substantial dowry were remote, these teenagers sought other employment opportunities, often at the urging of their parents. While young men could work at a variety of occupations, young women had more limited options. The textile mills provided suitable employment for the daughters of Yankee farm families. Needing to reassure anxious parents that their daughters’ virtue would be protected and hoping to avoid what they viewed as the problems of industrialization—filth and vice—the Boston Associates established strict rules governing the lives of these young workers. The women lived in company-owned boarding houses to which they paid a portion of their wages. They woke early at the sound of a bell and worked a twelve-hour day during which talking was forbidden. They could not swear or drink alcohol, and they were required to attend church on Sunday. Overseers at the mills and boarding-house keepers kept a close eye on the young women’s behavior; workers who associated with people of questionable reputation or acted in ways that called their virtue into question lost their jobs and were evicted. > **DEFINING AMERICAN** > **Michel Chevalier on Mill Worker Rules and Wages** > In the 1830s, the French government sent engineer and economist Michel Chevalier to study industrial and financial affairs in Mexico and the United States. In 1839, he published *Society, Manners, and Politics in the United States*, in which he recorded his impressions of the Lowell textile mills. In the excerpt below, Chevalier describes the rules and wages of the Lawrence Company in 1833. > > > All persons employed by the Company must devote themselves assiduously to their duty during working-hours. They must be capable of doing the work which they undertake, or use all their efforts to this effect. They must on all occasions, both in their words and in their actions, show that they are penetrated by a laudable love of temperance and virtue, and animated by a sense of their moral and social obligations. The Agent of the Company shall endeavour to set to all a good example in this respect. Every individual who shall be notoriously dissolute, idle, dishonest, or intemperate, who shall be in the practice of absenting himself from divine service, or shall violate the Sabbath, or shall be addicted to gaming, shall be dismissed from the service of the Company. . . . All ardent spirits are banished from the Company’s grounds, except when prescribed by a physician. All games of hazard and cards are prohibited within their limits and in the boarding-houses. > > Weekly wages were as follows: > > For picking and carding, $2.78 to $3.10 > > For spinning, $3.00 > > For weaving, $3.10 to $3.12 > > For warping and sizing, $3.45 to $4.00 --- > For measuring and folding, $3.12 > > What kind of world were the factory owners trying to create with these rules? How do you think those who believed all White people were born free and equal would react to them? ## CLICK AND EXPLORE Visit the National Park Service article on the Boott Cotton Mills of Lowell, Massachusetts to explore the history of the mills through photographs, diagrams, and maps. The mechanization of formerly handcrafted goods, and the removal of production from the home to the factory, dramatically increased output of goods. For example, in one nine-month period, the numerous Rhode Island women who spun yarn into cloth on hand looms in their homes produced a total of thirty-four thousand yards of fabrics of different types. In 1855, the women working in just one of Lowell’s mechanized mills produced more than forty-three thousand yards. The Boston Associates’ cotton mills quickly gained a competitive edge over the smaller mills established by Samuel Slater and those who had imitated him. Their success prompted the Boston Associates to expand. In Massachusetts, in addition to Lowell, they built new mill towns in Chicopee, Lawrence, and Holyoke. In New Hampshire, they built them in Manchester, Dover, and Nashua. And in Maine, they built a large mill in Saco on the Saco River. Other entrepreneurs copied them. By the time of the Civil War, 878 textile factories had been built in New England. All together, these factories employed more than 100,000 people and produced more than 940 million yards of cloth. Success in New England was repeated elsewhere. Small mills, more like those in Rhode Island than those in northern Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Maine, were built in New York, Delaware, and Pennsylvania. By midcentury, three hundred textile mills were located in and near Philadelphia. Many produced specialty goods, such as silks and printed