Fitzhugh’s ideas exemplified southern notions of paternalism. --- # DEFINING AMERICAN ## George Fitzhugh’s Defense of Slavery George Fitzhugh, a southern writer of social treatises, was a staunch supporter of slavery, not as a necessary evil but as what he argued was a necessary good, a way to take care of enslaved people and keep them from being a burden on society. He published *Sociology for the South, or the Failure of Free Society* in 1854, in which he laid out what he believed to be the benefits of slavery to both the enslaved and society as a whole. According to Fitzhugh: > [I]t is clear the Athenian democracy would not suit a negro nation, nor will the government of mere law suffice for the individual negro. He is but a grown up child and must be governed as a child . . . The master occupies towards him the place of parent or guardian. . . . The negro is improvident; will not lay up in summer for the wants of winter; will not accumulate in youth for the exigencies of age. He would become an insufferable burden to society. Society has the right to prevent this, and can only do so by subjecting him to domestic slavery. > In the last place, the negro race is inferior to the white race, and living in their midst, they would be far outstripped or outwitted in the chase of free competition. . . . Our negroes are not only better off as to physical comfort than free laborers, but their moral condition is better. What arguments does Fitzhugh use to promote slavery? What basic premise underlies his ideas? Can you think of a modern parallel to Fitzhugh’s argument? ---- The North also produced defenders of slavery, including Louis Agassiz, a Harvard professor of zoology and geology. Agassiz helped to popularize **polygenism**, the idea that different human races came from separate origins. According to this formulation, no single human family origin existed, and Black people made up a race wholly separate from the White race. Agassiz’s notion gained widespread popularity in the 1850s with the 1854 publication of George Gliddon and Josiah Nott’s *Types of Mankind* and other books. The theory of polygenism codified racism, giving the notion of Black inferiority the lofty mantle of science. One popular advocate of the idea posited that Black people occupied a place in evolution between the Greeks and chimpanzees (Figure 12.17). ---- **FIGURE 12.17** This 1857 illustration by an advocate of polygenism indicates that the “Negro” occupies a place between the Greeks and chimpanzees. The drawing of the skull next to the image of a Black person on the left-hand side of the illustration is an obvious fabrication, as it is clearly not a human skull. What does this image reveal about the methods of those who advocated polygenism? [The image shows a series of illustrations comparing human heads and skulls, including a Greek profile, a Black person’s profile, and a chimpanzee, with fabricated skull drawings meant to suggest evolutionary placement. The skull next to the Black person is clearly not a human skull, indicating manipulation to support polygenist claims.] --- # 12.4 The Filibuster and the Quest for New Slave States ### LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain the expansionist goals of advocates of slavery * Describe the filibuster expeditions undertaken during the antebellum era Southern expansionists had spearheaded the drive to add more territory to the United States. They applauded the Louisiana Purchase and fervently supported Native American removal, the annexation of Texas, and the Mexican-American War. Drawing inspiration from the annexation of Texas, proslavery expansionists hoped to replicate that feat by bringing Cuba and other territories into the United States and thereby enlarging the American empire of slavery. In the 1850s, the expansionist drive among White southerners intensified. Among southern imperialists, one way to push for the creation of an American empire of slavery was through the actions of filibusters—men who led unofficial military operations intended to seize land from foreign countries or foment revolution there. These unsanctioned military adventures were not part of the official foreign policy of the United States; American citizens simply formed themselves into private armies to forcefully annex new land without the government’s approval. An 1818 federal law made it a crime to undertake such adventures, which was an indication of both the reality of efforts at expansion through these illegal expeditions and the government’s effort to create a U.S. foreign policy. Nonetheless, Americans continued to filibuster throughout the nineteenth century. In 1819, an expedition of two hundred Americans invaded Spanish Texas, intent on creating a republic modeled on the United States, only to be driven out by Spanish forces. Using force, taking action, and asserting White supremacy in these militaristic drives were seen by many as an ideal of American male vigor. President Jackson epitomized this military prowess as an officer in the Tennessee militia, where earlier in the century he had played a leading role in ending the Red Stick War and forcing the Creek Nation to cede millions of acres in Alabama and Georgia. His reputation helped him to win the presidency in 1828 and again in 1832. Filibustering plots picked up pace in the 1850s as the drive for expansion continued. Slaveholders looked south to the Caribbean, Mexico, and Central America, hoping to add new slave states. Spanish Cuba became the objective of many American slaveholders in the 1850s, as debate over the island dominated the national conversation. Many who urged its annexation believed Cuba had to be made part of the United States to prevent it from going the route of Haiti, with enslaved Black people overthrowing their captors and creating another Black republic, a prospect horrifying to many in the United States. Americans also feared that the British, who had an interest in the sugar island, would make the first move and snatch Cuba from the United States. Since Britain had outlawed slavery in its colonies in 1833, Black people on the island of Cuba would then be free. Narciso López, a Venezuelan who wanted to end Spanish control of the island, gained American support. He tried five times to take the island, with his last effort occurring in the summer of 1851 when he led an armed group from New Orleans. Thousands came out to cheer his small force as they set off to wrest Cuba from the Spanish. Unfortunately for López and his supporters, however, the effort to take Cuba did not produce the hoped-for spontaneous uprising of the Cuban people. Spanish authorities in Cuba captured and executed López and the American filibusters. Efforts to take Cuba continued under President Franklin Pierce, who had announced at his inauguration in 1853 his intention to pursue expansion. In 1854, American diplomats met in Ostend, Belgium, to find a way to gain Cuba. They wrote a secret memo, known as the **Ostend Manifesto** (thought to be penned by James Buchanan, who was elected president two years later), stating that if Spain refused to sell Cuba to the United States, the United States was justified in taking the island as a national security measure. The contents of this memo were supposed to remain secret, but details were leaked to the public, leading the --- House of Representatives to demand a copy. Many in the North were outraged over what appeared to be a southern scheme, orchestrated by what they perceived as the Slave Power—a term they used to describe the disproportionate influence that elite slaveholders wielded—to expand slavery. European powers also reacted with anger. Southern annexationists, however, applauded the effort to take Cuba. The Louisiana legislature in 1854 asked the federal government to take decisive action, and John Quitman, a former Mississippi governor, raised money from slaveholders to fund efforts to take the island. ### CLICK AND EXPLORE Read an 1860 editorial titled Annexation of Cuba Made Easy from the online archives of *The New York Times*. Does the author support annexation? Why or why not? Controversy around the Ostend Manifesto caused President Pierce to step back from the plan to take Cuba. After his election, President Buchanan, despite his earlier expansionist efforts, denounced filibustering as the action of pirates. Filibustering caused an even wider gulf between the North and the South (Figure 12.18). [The image shows a lithograph titled "The Ostend Doctrine" (1856) by artist Louis Maurer and lithographer Nathaniel Currier. It mocks James Buchanan by depicting him being robbed by thugs who use specific phrases from the Ostend Manifesto as they relieve him of his belongings.] **FIGURE 12.18** The *“Ostend Doctrine”* (1856), by artist Louis Maurer and lithographer Nathaniel Currier, mocks James Buchanan by depicting him being robbed, just as many northerners believed slaveholders were attempting to rob Spain. The thugs robbing Buchanan use specific phrases from the Ostend Manifesto as they relieve him of his belongings. Cuba was not the only territory in slaveholders’ expansionist sights: some focused on Mexico and Central America. In 1855, Tennessee-born William Walker, along with an army of no more than sixty mercenaries, gained control of the Central American nation of Nicaragua. Previously, Walker had launched a successful invasion of Mexico, dubbing his conquered land the Republic of Sonora. In a relatively short period of time, Walker was dislodged from Sonora by Mexican authorities and forced to retreat back to the United States. His conquest of Nicaragua garnered far more attention, catapulting him into national popularity as the heroic embodiment of White supremacy (Figure 12.19). --- **FIGURE 12.19** Famed Civil War photographer Mathew Brady took this photograph (a) of “General” William Walker circa 1855–1860. Walker led a filibuster expedition and briefly conquered Nicaragua, fulfilling a dream of many pro-expansionist southern slaveholders. Cornelius Vanderbilt (b), the shipping tycoon who controlled much of the traffic across Nicaragua between the Atlantic and the Pacific, clashed with Walker and ultimately supported Costa Rica in its war against him. Why Nicaragua? Nicaragua presented a tempting target because it provided a quick route from the Caribbean to the Pacific: Only twelve miles of land stood between the Pacific Ocean, the inland Lake Nicaragua, and the river that drained into the Atlantic. Shipping from the East Coast to the West Coast of the United States had to travel either by land across the continent, south around the entire continent of South America, or through Nicaragua. Previously, American tycoon Cornelius Vanderbilt (Figure 12.19) had recognized the strategic importance of Nicaragua and worked with the Nicaraguan government to control shipping there. The filibustering of William Walker may have excited expansionist-minded southerners, but it greatly upset Vanderbilt’s business interests in the region. Walker clung to the racist, expansionist philosophies of the proslavery South. In 1856, Walker made slavery legal in Nicaragua—it had been illegal there for thirty years—in a move to gain the support of the South. He also reopened the slave trade. In 1856, he was elected president of Nicaragua, but in 1857, he was chased from the country. When he returned to Central America in 1860, he was captured by the British and released to Honduran authorities, who executed him by firing squad. --- # Key Terms **antebellum** a term meaning “before the war” and used to describe the decades before the American Civil War began in 1861 **cash crop** a crop grown to be sold for profit instead of consumption by the farmer’s family **concurrent majority** a majority of a separate region (that would otherwise be in the minority of the nation) with the power to veto or disallow legislation put forward by a hostile majority **cotton boom** the upswing in American cotton production during the nineteenth century **cotton gin** a device, patented by Eli Whitney in 1794, that separated the seeds from raw cotton quickly and easily **domestic slave trade** the trading of enslaved people within the borders of the United States **Ostend Manifesto** the secret diplomatic memo stating that if Spain refused to sell Cuba to the United States, the United States was justified in taking the island as a national security measure **paternalism** the premise that southern White slaveholders acted in the best interests of those they enslaved **polygenism** the idea that Black and White people come from different origins **second middle passage** the internal forced migration of enslaved people to the South and West in the United States # Summary ## 12.1 The Economics of Cotton In the years before the Civil War, the South produced the bulk of the world’s supply of cotton. The Mississippi River Valley slave states became the epicenter of cotton production, an area of frantic economic activity where the landscape changed dramatically as land was transformed from pinewoods and swamps into cotton fields. Cotton’s profitability relied on the institution of slavery, which generated the product that fueled cotton mill profits in the North. When the international slave trade was outlawed in 1808, the domestic slave trade exploded, providing economic opportunities for White people involved in many aspects of the trade and increasing the possibility of enslaved people’s dislocation and separation from kin and friends. Although the larger American and Atlantic markets relied on southern cotton in this era, the South depended on these other markets for food, manufactured goods, and loans. Thus, the market revolution transformed the South just as it had other regions. ## 12.2 African Americans in the Antebellum United States Slave labor in the antebellum South generated great wealth for plantation owners. Enslaved people, in contrast, endured daily traumas as human property. Enslaved people resisted their condition in a variety of ways, and many found some solace in Christianity and the communities they created in the slave quarters. While some free Black people achieved economic prosperity and even became slaveholders themselves, the vast majority found themselves restricted by the same White-supremacist assumptions upon which the institution of slavery was based. ## 12.3 Wealth and Culture in the South Although a small White elite owned the vast majority of enslaved people in the South, and most other White people could only aspire to slaveholders’ wealth and status, slavery shaped the social life of all White southerners in profound ways. Southern culture valued a behavioral code in which men’s honor, based on the domination of others and the protection of southern White womanhood, stood as the highest good. Slavery also decreased class tensions, binding White people together on the basis of race despite their inequalities of wealth. Several defenses of slavery were prevalent in the antebellum era, including Calhoun’s argument that the South’s “concurrent majority” could overrule federal legislation deemed hostile to southern interests; the notion that slaveholders’ care of their chattel made the enslaved better off than wage workers in the North; and the profoundly racist ideas underlying polygenism. --- # 12.4 The Filibuster and the Quest for New Slave States The decade of the 1850s witnessed various schemes to expand the American empire of slavery. The Ostend Manifesto articulated the right of the United States to forcefully seize Cuba if Spain would not sell it, while filibuster expeditions attempted to annex new slave states without the benefit of governmental approval. Those who pursued the goal of expanding American slavery believed they embodied the true spirit of White racial superiority. ## Review Questions 1. Which of the following was *not* one of the effects of the cotton boom? A. U.S. trade increased with France and Spain. B. Northern manufacturing expanded. C. The need for slave labor grew. D. Port cities like New Orleans expanded. 2. The abolition of the foreign slave trade in 1807 led to _______. A. a dramatic decrease in the price and demand for enslaved people B. the rise of a thriving domestic slave trade C. a reform movement calling for the complete end to slavery in the United States D. the decline of cotton production 3. Why did some southerners believe their region was immune to the effects of the market revolution? Why was this thinking misguided? 4. Under the law in the antebellum South, enslaved people were _______. A. servants B. animals C. property D. indentures 5. How did both slaveholders and enslaved people use the concept of paternalism to their advantage? 6. The largest group of White people in the South _______. A. enslaved no one B. enslaved between one and nine people each C. enslaved between ten and ninety-nine people each D. enslaved over one hundred people each 7. John C. Calhoun argued for greater rights for southerners with which idea? A. polygenism B. nullification C. concurrent majority D. paternalism 8. How did defenders of slavery use the concept of paternalism to structure their ideas? 9. Why did southern expansionists conduct filibuster expeditions? A. to gain political advantage B. to annex new slave states C. to prove they could raise an army D. to map unknown territories --- 10. The controversy at the heart of the Ostend Manifesto centered on the fate of: A. Ostend, Belgium B. Nicaragua C. Cuba D. Louisiana 11. Why did expansionists set their sights on the annexation of Spanish Cuba? **Critical Thinking Questions** 12. Compare and contrast the steamboats of the antebellum years with technologies today. In your estimation, what modern technology compares to steamboats in its transformative power? 13. Does the history of the cotton kingdom support or undermine the Jeffersonian vision of White farmers on self-sufficient farms? Explain your answer. 14. Based on your reading of William J. Anderson’s and John Brown’s accounts, what types of traumas did enslaved people experience? How were the experiences of Black women and men similar and different? 15. What strategies did enslaved people employ to resist, revolt, and sustain their own independent communities and cultures? How did enslaved individuals use White southerners’ own philosophies—paternalism and Christianity, for example—to their advantage in these efforts? 16. What are the major arguments put forward by proslavery advocates? How would you argue against their statements? 17. Consider filibustering from the point of view of the Cuban or Nicaraguan people. If you lived in Cuba or Nicaragua, would you support filibustering? Why or why not? --- 332 12 • Critical Thinking Questions Access for free at openstax.org --- # Antebellum Idealism and Reform Impulses, 1820–1860 13 ---- **FIGURE 13.1** The masthead of *The Liberator*, by Hammatt Billings in 1850, highlights the religious aspect of antislavery crusades. *The Liberator* was an abolitionist newspaper published by William Lloyd Garrison, one of the leaders of the abolitionist movement in the United States. ---- ## CHAPTER OUTLINE **13.1** An Awakening of Religion and Individualism **13.2** Antebellum Communal Experiments **13.3** Reforms to Human Health **13.4** Addressing Slavery **13.5** Women’s Rights ---- **INTRODUCTION** This masthead for the abolitionist newspaper *The Liberator* shows two Americas (Figure 13.1). On the left is the southern version where enslaved people are being sold; on the right, free Black people enjoy the blessing of liberty. Reflecting the role of evangelical Protestantism in reforms such as abolition, the image features Jesus as the central figure. The caption reads, “I come to break the bonds of the oppressor,” and below the masthead, “Our country is the World, our Countrymen are all Mankind.” The reform efforts of the antebellum years, including abolitionism, aimed to perfect the national destiny and redeem the souls of individual Americans. A great deal of optimism, fueled by evangelical Protestantism revivalism, underwrote the moral crusades of the first half of the nineteenth century. Some reformers targeted what they perceived as the shallow, materialistic, and democratic market culture of the United States and advocated a stronger sense of individualism and self-reliance. Others dreamed of a more equal society and established their own idealistic communities. Still others, who viewed slavery as the most serious flaw in American life, labored to end the institution. Women’s rights, temperance, health reforms, and a host of other efforts also came to the forefront during the heyday of reform in the 1830s and 1840s. ---- ### 13.1 An Awakening of Religion and Individualism **LEARNING OBJECTIVES** By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain the connection between evangelical Protestantism and the Second Great Awakening * Describe the message of the transcendentalists --- <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">FIGURE 13.2</th> </tr> <tr> <th>1827</th> <th>1830</th> <th>1831</th> <th>1833</th> <th>1841</th> <th>1848</th> <th>1854</th> <th>1855</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td colspan="1"><b>American Temperance Society is formed</b></td> <td colspan="1"><b>Joseph Smith founds Church of the Latter Day Saints</b></td> <td colspan="1"><b>Nat Turner leads slave rebellion</b></td>