shelter. There was no dignity in such a life. In contrast, they argued, southern enslaved people were provided with a home, the necessities of life, and the protection of their slaveholders. Factory owners did not care for or protect their employees in the same way. ### THE FREE-SOIL PARTY AND THE ELECTION OF 1848 The Wilmot Proviso was an issue of great importance to the Democrats. Would they pledge to support it? At the party’s New York State convention in Buffalo, Martin Van Buren’s antislavery supporters—called **Barnburners** because they were likened to farmers who were willing to burn down their own barn to get rid of a rat infestation—spoke in favor of the proviso. Their opponents, known as Hunkers, refused to support it. Angered, the Barnburners organized their own convention, where they chose antislavery, pro–Wilmot Proviso delegates to send to the Democrats’ national convention in Baltimore. In this way, the controversy over the expansion of slavery divided the Democratic Party. At the national convention, both sets of delegates were seated—the pro-proviso ones chosen by the Barnburners and the anti-proviso ones chosen by the Hunkers. When it came time to vote for the party’s presidential nominee, the majority of votes were for Lewis Cass, an advocate of popular sovereignty. Popular sovereignty was the belief that citizens should be able to decide issues based on the principle of majority rule; in this case, residents of a territory should have the right to decide whether slavery would be allowed in it. Theoretically, this doctrine would allow slavery to become established in any U.S. territory, including those from which it had been banned by earlier laws. Disgusted by the result, the Barnburners united with antislavery Whigs and former members of the Liberty Party to form a new political party—the **Free-Soil Party**, which took as its slogan “Free Soil, Free Speech, Free Labor, and Free Men.” The party had one real goal—to oppose the extension of slavery into the territories (Figure 11.21). In the minds of its members and many other northerners of the time, southern slaveholders had marshaled their wealth and power to control national politics for the purpose of protecting the institution of slavery and extending it into the territories. Many in the Free-Soil Party believed in this far-reaching conspiracy of the slaveholding elite to control both foreign affairs and domestic policies for their own ends, a cabal that came to be known as the **Slave Power**. --- **FIGURE 11.21** This political cartoon depicts Martin Van Buren and his son John, both Barnburners, forcing the slavery issue within the Democratic Party by “smoking out” fellow Democrat Lewis Cass on the roof. Their support of the Wilmot Proviso and the new Free-Soil Party is demonstrated by John’s declaration, “That’s you Dad! more ‘Free-Soil.’ We'll rat ‘em out yet. Long life to Davy Wilmot.” (credit: Library of Congress) [The image shows a political cartoon titled "SMOKING HIM OUT." It depicts Martin Van Buren and his son John, both Barnburners, forcing the slavery issue within the Democratic Party by "smoking out" fellow Democrat Lewis Cass on the roof. John is shown declaring support for Free-Soil.] In the wake of the Mexican War, antislavery sentiment entered mainstream American politics when the new Free-Soil party promptly selected Martin Van Buren as its presidential candidate. For the first time, a national political party committed itself to the goal of stopping the expansion of slavery. The Democrats chose Lewis Cass, and the Whigs nominated General Zachary Taylor, as Polk had assumed they would. On Election Day, Democrats split their votes between Van Buren and Cass. With the strength of the Democratic vote diluted, Taylor won. His popularity with the American people served him well, and his status as a slaveholder helped him win the South. ### CLICK AND EXPLORE Visit the archives of the Gilder Lehrman Institute to read an August 1848 letter from Gerrit Smith, a staunch abolitionist, regarding the Free-Soil candidate, Martin Van Buren. Smith played a major role in the Liberty Party and was their presidential candidate in 1848. ---- ### THE COMPROMISE OF 1850 The election of 1848 did nothing to quell the controversy over whether slavery would advance into the Mexican Cession. Some slaveholders, like President Taylor, considered the question a moot point because the lands acquired from Mexico were far too dry for growing cotton and therefore, they thought, no slaveholder would want to move there. Other southerners, however, argued that the question was not whether slaveholders *would* want to move to the lands of the Mexican Cession, but whether they *could* and still retain control of their enslaved property. Denying them the right to freely relocate with their lawful property was, they maintained, unfair and unconstitutional. Northerners argued, just as fervidly, that because Mexico had abolished slavery, no enslaved people currently lived in the Mexican Cession, and to introduce slavery there would extend it to a new territory, thus furthering the institution and giving the Slave Power more control over the United States. The strong current of antislavery sentiment—that is, the desire to protect White labor—only increased the opposition to the expansion of slavery into the West. Most northerners, except members of the Free-Soil Party, favored popular sovereignty for California and the New Mexico territory. Many southerners opposed this position, however, for they feared residents of these regions might choose to outlaw slavery. Some southern politicians spoke ominously of secession from the United States. Free-Soilers rejected popular sovereignty and demanded that slavery be permanently excluded from the territories. Beginning in January 1850, Congress worked for eight months on a compromise that might quiet the growing --- sectional conflict. Led by the aged Henry Clay, members finally agreed to the following: 1. California, which was ready to enter the Union, was admitted as a free state in accordance with its state constitution. 2. Popular sovereignty was to determine the status of slavery in New Mexico and Utah, even though Utah and part of New Mexico were north of the Missouri Compromise line. 3. The slave trade was banned in the nation’s capital. Slavery, however, was allowed to remain. 4. Under a new fugitive slave law, those who helped escaped enslaved individuals or refused to assist in their return would be fined and possibly imprisoned. 5. The border between Texas and New Mexico was established. The **Compromise of 1850** brought temporary relief. It resolved the issue of slavery in the territories for the moment and prevented secession. The peace would not last, however. Instead of relieving tensions between North and South, it had actually made them worse. --- # Key Terms **alcalde** a Mexican official who often served as combined civil administrator, judge, and law enforcement officer **Barnburners** northern Democrats loyal to Martin Van Buren who opposed the extension of slavery into the territories and broke away from the main party when it nominated a pro-popular sovereignty candidate **Californios** Mexican residents of California **Compromise of 1850** five separate laws passed by Congress in September 1850 to resolve issues stemming from the Mexican Cession and the sectional crisis **Corps of Discovery** the group led by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark on the expedition to explore and map the territory acquired in the Louisiana Purchase **empresario** a person who brought new settlers to Texas in exchange for a grant of land **filibuster** a person who engages in an unofficial military operation intended to seize land from foreign countries or foment revolution there **forty-niners** the nickname for those who traveled to California in 1849 in hopes of finding gold **Free-Soil Party** a political party that sought to exclude slavery from the western territories, leaving these areas open for settlement by White farmers and ensuring that White laborers would not have to compete with enslaved labor **Liberty Party** a political party formed in 1840 by those who believed political measures were the best means by which abolition could be accomplished **Mexican Cession** the lands west of the Rio Grande ceded to the United States by Mexico in 1848, including California, Arizona, New Mexico, Nevada, Utah, and parts of Wyoming and Colorado **Missouri Compromise** an agreement reached in Congress in 1820 that allowed Missouri to enter the Union as a slave state, brought Maine into the Union as a free state, and prohibited slavery north of 36° 30' latitude **Northwest Passage** the nonexistent all-water route across the North American continent sought by European and American explorers **Slave Power** a term northerners used to describe the disproportionate influence that they felt elite southern slaveholders wielded in both domestic and international affairs **Tallmadge Amendment** an amendment (which did not pass) proposed by representative James Tallmadge in 1819 that called for Missouri to be admitted as a free state and for all enslaved people there to be gradually emancipated **Tejanos** Mexican residents of Texas **Wilmot Proviso** an amendment to a revenue bill that would have barred slavery from all the territory acquired from Mexico # Summary ## 11.1 Lewis and Clark In 1803, Thomas Jefferson appointed Meriwether Lewis to organize an expedition into the Louisiana Territory to explore and map the area but also to find an all-water route from the Missouri River to the Pacific Coast. The Louisiana Purchase and the journey of Lewis and Clark’s Corps of Discovery captured the imagination of many, who dedicated themselves to the economic exploitation of the western lands and the expansion of American influence and power. In the South, the Adams-Onís treaty legally secured Florida for the United States, though it did nothing to end the resistance of the Seminoles against American expansionists. At the same time, the treaty frustrated those Americans who considered Texas a part of the Louisiana Purchase. Taking matters into their own hands, some American settlers tried to take Texas by force. ## 11.2 The Missouri Crisis The Missouri Crisis created a division over slavery that profoundly and ominously shaped sectional identities and rivalries as never before. Conflict over the uneasy balance between slave and free states in Congress came to a head when Missouri petitioned to join the Union as a slave state in 1819, and the debate broadened from --- simple issues of representation to a critique of the morality of slavery. The debates also raised the specter of disunion and civil war, leading many, including Thomas Jefferson, to fear for the future of the republic. Under the Missouri Compromise, Missouri and Maine entered the Union at the same time, Maine as a free state, Missouri as a slave state, and a line was drawn across the remainder of the Louisiana territory north of which slavery was forbidden. ### 11.3 Independence for Texas The establishment of the Lone Star Republic formed a new chapter in the history of U.S. westward expansion. In contrast to the addition of the Louisiana Territory through diplomacy with France, Americans in Texas employed violence against Mexico to achieve their goals. Orchestrated largely by slaveholders, the acquisition of Texas appeared the next logical step in creating an American empire that included slavery. Nonetheless, with the Missouri Crisis in mind, the United States refused the Texans’ request to enter the United States as a slave state in 1836. Instead, Texas formed an independent republic where slavery was legal. But American settlers there continued to press for more land. The strained relationship between expansionists in Texas and Mexico in the early 1840s hinted of things to come. ### 11.4 The Mexican-American War, 1846–1848 President James K. Polk’s administration was a period of intensive expansion for the United States. After overseeing the final details regarding the annexation of Texas from Mexico, Polk negotiated a peaceful settlement with Great Britain regarding ownership of the Oregon Country, which brought the United States what are now the states of Washington and Oregon. The acquisition of additional lands from Mexico, a country many in the United States perceived as weak and inferior, was not so bloodless. The Mexican Cession added nearly half of Mexico’s territory to the United States, including New Mexico and California, and established the U.S.-Mexico border at the Rio Grande. The California Gold Rush rapidly expanded the population of the new territory, but also prompted concerns over immigration, especially from China, and led to a massive loss of Native American life in the state. ### 11.5 Free or Slave Soil? The Dilemma of the West The acquisition of lands from Mexico in 1848 reawakened debates regarding slavery. The suggestion that slavery be barred from the Mexican Cession caused rancorous debate between North and South and split the Democratic Party when many northern members left to create the Free-Soil Party. Although the Compromise of 1850 resolved the question of whether slavery would be allowed in the new territories, the solution pleased no one. The peace brought by the compromise was short-lived, and the debate over slavery continued. ## Review Questions 1. As a result of the Adams-Onís Treaty, the United States gained which territory from Spain? A. Florida B. New Mexico C. California D. Nevada 2. The Long Expedition established a short-lived republic in Texas known as ________. A. the Lone Star Republic B. the Republic of Texas C. Columbiana D. the Republic of Fredonia 3. For what purposes did Thomas Jefferson send Lewis and Clark to explore the Louisiana Territory? What did he want them to accomplish? 4. A proposal to prohibit the importation of enslaved people to Missouri following its admission to the United --- States was made by ________. A. John C. Calhoun B. Henry Clay C. James Tallmadge D. John Quincy Adams 5. To balance votes in the Senate, ________ was admitted to the Union as a free state at the same time that Missouri was admitted as a slave state. A. Florida B. Maine C. New York D. Arkansas 6. Why did the Missouri Crisis trigger threats of disunion and war? Identify the positions of both southern slaveholders and northern opponents of the spread of slavery. 7. Texas won its independence from Mexico in ________. A. 1821 B. 1830 C. 1836 D. 1845 8. Texans defeated the army of General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna at the battle of ________. A. the Alamo B. San Jacinto C. Nacogdoches D. Austin 9. How did Texas settlers’ view of Mexico and its people contribute to the history of Texas in the 1830s? 10. Which of the following was *not* a reason the United States was reluctant to annex Texas? A. The United States did not want to fight a war with Mexico. B. Annexing Texas would add more slave territory to the United States and anger abolitionists. C. Texans considered U.S. citizens inferior and did not want to be part of their country. D. Adding Texas would upset the balance between free and slave states in Congress. 11. According to treaties signed in 1818 and 1827, with which country did the United States jointly occupy Oregon? A. Great Britain B. Spain C. Mexico D. France 12. During the war between the United States and Mexico, revolts against U.S. control broke out in ________. A. Florida and Texas B. New Mexico and California C. California and Texas D. Florida and California 13. Why did White people in California dislike the Chinese so much? 14. The practice of allowing residents of territories to decide whether their land should be slave or free was --- called ________. A. the democratic process B. the Wilmot Proviso C. popular sovereignty D. the Free Soil solution 15. Which of the following was not a provision of the Compromise of 1850? A. California was admitted as a free state. B. Slavery was abolished in Washington, DC. C. A stronger fugitive slave law was passed. D. Residents of New Mexico and Utah were to decide for themselves whether their territories would be slave or free. 16. Describe the events leading up to the formation of the Free-Soil Party. ### Critical Thinking Questions 17. Consider the role of filibusters in American expansion. What are some arguments in favor of filibustering? What are some arguments against it? 18. What are the economic and political issues raised by having an imbalance between free and slave states? Why did the balance of free and slave states matter? 19. How did Anglo-American settlers in Texas see themselves? Did they adopt a Mexican identity because they were living in Mexican territory? Why or why not? 20. Consider the annexation of Texas and the Mexican-American War from a Mexican perspective. What would you find objectionable about American actions, foreign policy, and attitudes in the 1840s? 21. Describe the place of Texas in the history of American westward expansion by comparing Texas’s early history to the Missouri Crisis in 1819–1820. What are the similarities and what are the differences? 22. Consider the arguments over the expansion of slavery made by both northerners and southerners in the aftermath of the U.S. victory over Mexico. Who had the more compelling case? Or did each side make equally significant arguments? --- # Cotton is King: The Antebellum South, 1800–1860 **FIGURE 12.1** *Bateaux à Vapeur Géant, la Nouvelle-Orléans 1853 (Giant Steamboats at New Orleans, 1853)*, by Hippolyte Sebron, shows how New Orleans, at the mouth of the Mississippi River, was the primary trading hub for the cotton that fueled the growth of the southern economy. ## CHAPTER OUTLINE **12.1** The Economics of Cotton **12.2** African Americans in the Antebellum United States **12.3** Wealth and Culture in the South **12.4** The Filibuster and the Quest for New Slave States ## INTRODUCTION Nine new slave states entered the Union between 1789 and 1860, rapidly expanding and transforming the South into a region of economic growth built on slave labor. In the image above (Figure 12.1), innumerable enslaved workers load cargo onto a steamship in the Port of New Orleans, the commercial center of the antebellum South, while two well-dressed White men stand by talking. Commercial activity extends as far as the eye can see. By the mid-nineteenth century, southern commercial centers like New Orleans had become home to the greatest concentration of wealth in the United States. While most White southerners did not own land, they aspired to join the ranks of elite slaveholders, who played a key role in the politics of both the South and the nation. Meanwhile, slavery shaped the culture and society of the South, which rested on a racial ideology of White supremacy and a vision of the United States as a White man’s republic. Enslaved people endured the traumas of slavery by creating their own culture and using the Christian message of redemption to find hope for a world of freedom without violence. --- # 12.1 The Economics of Cotton ### LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain the labor-intensive processes of cotton production * Describe the importance of cotton to the Atlantic and American antebellum economy ---- ### Timeline (Figure 12.2) | Year | Event | |-------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| | 1794 | Eli Whitney patents cotton gin | | 1803 | *U.S. purchases Louisiana Territory from France* | | 1811 | Charles Deslondes leads slave revolt in Louisiana | | 1831 | Nat Turner leads slave rebellion | | 1845 | United States annexes Texas | | 1850 | John C. Calhoun’s *“Disquisition on Government”* is published | | 1852 | Harriet Beecher Stowe publishes *Uncle Tom’s Cabin* | | 1854 | *Ostend Manifesto* is made public | | 1855 | William Walker conquers Nicaragua and legalizes slavery | ---- In the **antebellum** era—that is, in the years before the Civil War—American planters in the South continued to grow Chesapeake tobacco and Carolina rice as they had in the colonial era. Cotton, however, emerged as the antebellum South’s major commercial crop, eclipsing tobacco, rice, and sugar in economic importance. By 1860, the region was producing two-thirds of the world’s cotton. In 1793, Eli Whitney revolutionized the production of cotton when he developed the **cotton gin**, likely influenced by suggestions from enslaved people. It was a device that separated the seeds from raw cotton. Suddenly, a process that was extraordinarily labor-intensive when done by hand could be completed quickly and easily. American plantation owners, who were searching for a successful staple crop to compete on the world market, found it in cotton. As a commodity, cotton had the advantage of being easily stored and transported. A demand for it already existed in the industrial textile mills in Great Britain, and in time, a steady stream of slave-grown American cotton would also supply northern textile mills. Southern cotton, picked and processed by enslaved labor, helped fuel the nineteenth-century Industrial Revolution in both the United States and Great Britain. ---- ## KING COTTON Almost no cotton was grown in the United States in 1787, the year the federal constitution was written. However, following the War of 1812, a huge increase in production resulted in the so-called **cotton boom**, and by midcentury, cotton became the key **cash crop** (a crop grown to sell rather than for the farmer’s sole use) of the southern economy and the most important American commodity. By 1850, of the 3.2 million enslaved people in the country’s fifteen