thousand Cherokee were finally relocated to Oklahoma. This forced migration, known as the **Trail of Tears**, caused the deaths of as many as four thousand Cherokee (Figure 10.15). The Creek, Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Seminole peoples were also compelled to go. The removal of the Five Civilized Tribes provides an example of the power of majority opinion in a democracy. --- **FIGURE 10.15** After the passage of the Indian Removal Act, the U.S. military forced the Cherokee, Creek, Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Seminole to relocate from the Southeast to an area in the western territory (now Oklahoma), marching them along the routes shown here. ---- ### CLICK AND EXPLORE Explore the interactive Trail of Tears map at the National Park Service to see the routes the Cherokee took when they were expelled from their lands. Then listen to a collection of Cherokee oral histories including verses of a Cherokee-language song about the Trail of Tears. What do you think is the importance of oral history in documenting the Cherokee experience? ---- ### BLACK HAWK’S WAR The policy of removal led some Native Americans to actively resist. In 1832, the Fox and the Sauk, led by Sauk chief Black Hawk (Makataimeshekiakiah), moved back across the Mississippi River to reclaim their ancestral home in northern Illinois. A brief war in 1832, Black Hawk’s War, ensued. White settlers panicked at the return of the Sauk, and militias and federal troops quickly mobilized. At the Bad Axe Massacre, they killed over two hundred men, women, and children. Some seventy White settlers and soldiers also lost their lives in the conflict (Figure 10.16). The war, which lasted only a matter of weeks, illustrates how much White people on the frontier hated and feared Native Americans during the Age of Jackson. --- # 10.5 The Tyranny and Triumph of the Majority **LEARNING OBJECTIVES** By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain Alexis de Tocqueville’s analysis of American democracy * Describe the election of 1840 and its outcome To some observers, the rise of democracy in the United States raised troubling questions about the new power of the majority to silence minority opinion. As the will of the majority became the rule of the day, everyone outside of mainstream, White American opinion, especially Native American and Black people, were vulnerable to the wrath of the majority. Some worried that the rights of those who opposed the will of the majority would never be safe. Mass democracy also shaped political campaigns as never before. The 1840 presidential election marked a significant turning point in the evolving style of American democratic politics. ## ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE Perhaps the most insightful commentator on American democracy was the young French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville, whom the French government sent to the United States to report on American prison reforms (Figure 10.17). Tocqueville marveled at the spirit of democracy that pervaded American life. Given his place in French society, however, much of what he saw of American democracy caused him concern. ---- **FIGURE 10.16** Charles Bird King’s 1837 portrait *Sauk Chief Makataimeshekiakiah, or Black Hawk* (a), depicts the Sauk chief who led the Fox and Sauk peoples in an ill-fated effort to return to their native lands in northern Illinois. This engraving depicting the Bad Axe Massacre (b) shows U.S. soldiers on a steamer firing on Native Americans aboard a raft. (credit b: modification of work by Library of Congress) [a] Charles Bird King’s 1837 portrait of Sauk Chief Makataimeshekiakiah, or Black Hawk, showing a Native American man with a red feathered headdress and red shawl. [b] Black and white engraving showing a steamboat labeled "WARRIOR" firing on Native Americans on a raft in a river, with hills and trees in the background. --- **FIGURE 10.17** Alexis de Tocqueville is best known for his insightful commentary on American democracy found in *De la démocratie en Amérique*. The first volume of Tocqueville’s two-volume work was immediately popular throughout Europe. The first English translation, by Henry Reeve and titled *Democracy in America* (a), was published in New York in 1838. Théodore Chassériau painted this portrait of Alexis de Tocqueville in 1850 (b). Tocqueville’s experience led him to believe that democracy was an unstoppable force that would one day overthrow monarchy around the world. He wrote and published his findings in 1835 and 1840 in a two-part work entitled *Democracy in America*. In analyzing the democratic revolution in the United States, he wrote that the major benefit of democracy came in the form of equality before the law. A great deal of the social revolution of democracy, however, carried negative consequences. Indeed, Tocqueville described a new type of tyranny, the **tyranny of the majority**, which overpowers the will of minorities and individuals and was, in his view, unleashed by democracy in the United States. In this excerpt from *Democracy in America*, Alexis de Tocqueville warns of the dangers of democracy when the majority will can turn to tyranny: > When an individual or a party is wronged in the United States, to whom can he apply for redress? If to public opinion, public opinion constitutes the majority; if to the legislature, it represents the majority, and implicitly obeys its injunctions; if to the executive power, it is appointed by the majority, and remains a passive tool in its hands; the public troops consist of the majority under arms; the jury is the majority invested with the right of hearing judicial cases; and in certain States even the judges are elected by the majority. However iniquitous or absurd the evil of which you complain may be, you must submit to it as well as you can. > The authority of a king is purely physical, and it controls the actions of the subject without subduing his private will; but the majority possesses a power which is physical and moral at the same time; it acts upon the will as well as upon the actions of men, and it represses not only all contest, but all controversy. I know no country in which there is so little true independence of mind and freedom of discussion as in America. ---- ### CLICK AND EXPLORE Take the Alexis de Tocqueville Tour to experience nineteenth-century America as Tocqueville did, by reading his journal entries about the states and territories he visited with fellow countryman Gustave de Beaumont. What regional differences can you draw from his descriptions? --- # THE 1840 ELECTION The presidential election contest of 1840 marked the culmination of the democratic revolution that swept the United States. By this time, the **second party system** had taken hold, a system whereby the older Federalist and Democratic-Republican Parties had been replaced by the new Democratic and Whig Parties. Both Whigs and Democrats jockeyed for election victories and commanded the steady loyalty of political partisans. Large-scale presidential campaign rallies and emotional propaganda became the order of the day. Voter turnout increased dramatically under the second party system. Roughly 25 percent of eligible voters had cast ballots in 1828. In 1840, voter participation surged to nearly 80 percent. The differences between the parties were largely about economic policies. Whigs advocated accelerated economic growth, often endorsing federal government projects to achieve that goal. Democrats did not view the federal government as an engine promoting economic growth and advocated a smaller role for the national government. The membership of the parties also differed: Whigs tended to be wealthier; they were prominent planters in the South and wealthy urban northerners—in other words, the beneficiaries of the market revolution. Democrats presented themselves as defenders of the common people against the elite. In the 1840 presidential campaign, taking their cue from the Democrats who had lionized Jackson’s military accomplishments, the Whigs promoted William Henry Harrison as a war hero based on his 1811 military service against the Shawnee chief Tecumseh at the Battle of Tippecanoe. John Tyler of Virginia ran as the vice presidential candidate, leading the Whigs to trumpet, “Tippecanoe and Tyler too!” as a campaign slogan. The campaign thrust Harrison into the national spotlight. Democrats tried to discredit him by declaring, “Give him a barrel of hard [alcoholic] cider and settle a pension of two thousand a year on him, and take my word for it, he will sit the remainder of his days in his log cabin.” The Whigs turned the slur to their advantage by presenting Harrison as a man of the people who had been born in a log cabin (in fact, he came from a privileged background in Virginia), and the contest became known as the **log cabin campaign** (Figure 10.18). At Whig political rallies, the faithful were treated to whiskey made by the E. C. Booz Company, leading to the introduction of the word “booze” into the American lexicon. Tippecanoe Clubs, where booze flowed freely, helped in the marketing of the Whig candidate. ---- **FIGURE 10.18** The Whig campaign song “Tippecanoe and Tyler Too!” (a) and the anti-Whig flyers (b) that were circulated in response to the “log cabin campaign” illustrate the partisan fervor of the 1840 election. ---- The Whigs’ efforts, combined with their strategy of blaming Democrats for the lingering economic collapse --- that began with the hard-currency Panic of 1837, succeeded in carrying the day. A mass campaign with political rallies and party mobilization had molded a candidate to fit an ideal palatable to a majority of American voters, and in 1840 Harrison won what many consider the first modern election. --- # Key Terms **American System** the program of federally sponsored roads and canals, protective tariffs, and a national bank advocated by Henry Clay and enacted by President Adams **code of deference** the practice of showing respect for individuals who had distinguished themselves through accomplishments or birth **corrupt bargain** the term that Andrew Jackson’s supporters applied to John Quincy Adams’s 1824 election, which had occurred through the machinations of Henry Clay in the U.S. House of Representatives **Five Civilized Tribes** the five tribes—Cherokee, Seminole, Creek, Choctaw, and Chickasaw—who had most thoroughly adopted Anglo-American culture; they also happened to be the tribes that were believed to stand in the way of western settlement in the South **Kitchen Cabinet** a nickname for Andrew Jackson’s informal group of loyal advisers **log cabin campaign** the 1840 election, in which the Whigs painted William Henry Harrison as a man of the people **monster bank** the term Democratic opponents used to denounce the Second Bank of the United States as an emblem of special privilege and big government **nullification** the theory, advocated in response to the Tariff of 1828, that states could void federal law at their discretion **rotation in office** originally, simply the system of having term limits on political appointments; in the Jackson era, this came to mean the replacement of officials with party loyalists **second party system** the system in which the Democratic and Whig Parties were the two main political parties after the decline of the Federalist and Democratic-Republican Parties **spoils system** the political system of rewarding friends and supporters with political appointments **Tariff of Abominations** a federal tariff introduced in 1828 that placed a high duty on imported goods in order to help American manufacturers, which southerners viewed as unfair and harmful to their region **Trail of Tears** the route of the forced removal of the Cherokee and other tribes from the southeastern United States to the territory that is now Oklahoma **tyranny of the majority** Alexis de Tocqueville’s phrase warning of the dangers of American democracy **universal manhood suffrage** voting rights for all male adults **Whigs** a political party that emerged in the early 1830s to oppose what members saw as President Andrew Jackson’s abuses of power # Summary ## 10.1 A New Political Style: From John Quincy Adams to Andrew Jackson The early 1800s saw an age of deference give way to universal manhood suffrage and a new type of political organization based on loyalty to the party. The election of 1824 was a fight among Democratic-Republicans that ended up pitting southerner Andrew Jackson against northerner John Quincy Adams. When Adams won through political negotiations in the House of Representatives, Jackson’s supporters derided the election as a “corrupt bargain.” The Tariff of 1828 further stirred southern sentiment, this time against a perceived bias in the federal government toward northeastern manufacturers. At the same time, the tariff stirred deeper fears that the federal government might take steps that could undermine the system of slavery. ## 10.2 The Rise of American Democracy The Democratic-Republicans’ “corrupt bargain” that brought John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay to office in 1824 also helped to push them out of office in 1828. Jackson used it to highlight the cronyism of Washington politics. Supporters presented him as a true man of the people fighting against the elitism of Clay and Adams. Jackson rode a wave of populist fervor all the way to the White House, ushering in the ascendency of a new political party: the Democrats. Although Jackson ran on a platform of clearing the corruption out of Washington, he rewarded his own loyal followers with plum government jobs, thus continuing and intensifying the cycle of favoritism and corruption. Access for free at openstax.org --- # 10.3 The Nullification Crisis and the Bank War Andrew Jackson’s election in 1832 signaled the rise of the Democratic Party and a new style of American politics. Jackson understood the views of the majority, and he skillfully used the popular will to his advantage. He adroitly navigated through the Nullification Crisis and made headlines with what his supporters viewed as his righteous war against the bastion of money, power, and entrenched insider interests, the Second Bank of the United States. His actions, however, stimulated opponents to fashion an opposition party, the Whigs. # 10.4 Indian Removal Popular culture in the Age of Jackson emphasized the perceived savagery of the Native peoples and shaped domestic policy. Popular animosity found expression in the Indian Removal Act. Even the U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling in favor of the Cherokee in Georgia offered no protection against the forced removal of the Five Civilized Tribes from the Southeast, mandated by the 1830 Indian Removal Act and carried out by the U.S. military. # 10.5 The Tyranny and Triumph of the Majority American culture of the 1830s reflected the rise of democracy. The majority exercised a new type of power that went well beyond politics, leading Alexis de Tocqueville to write about the “tyranny of the majority.” Very quickly, politicians among the Whigs and Democrats learned to master the magic of the many by presenting candidates and policies that catered to the will of the majority. In the 1840 “log cabin campaign,” both sides engaged in the new democratic electioneering. The uninhibited expression during the campaign inaugurated a new political style. ## Review Questions 1. Which group saw an expansion of their voting rights in the early nineteenth century? A. free Black people B. non-property-owning men C. women D. Native Americans 2. What was the lasting impact of the Bucktail Republican Party in New York? A. They implemented universal suffrage. B. They pushed for the expansion of the canal system. C. They elevated Martin Van Buren to the national political stage. D. They changed state election laws from an appointee system to a system of open elections. 3. Who won the popular vote in the election of 1824? A. Andrew Jackson B. Martin Van Buren C. Henry Clay D. John Quincy Adams 4. Why did Andrew Jackson and his supporters consider the election of John Quincy Adams to be a “corrupt bargain”? 5. Who stood to gain from the Tariff of Abominations, and who expected to lose by it? 6. What was the actual result of Jackson’s policy of “rotation in office”? A. an end to corruption in Washington B. a replacement of Adams’s political loyalists with Jackson’s political loyalists C. the filling of government posts with officials the people chose themselves D. the creation of the Kitchen Cabinet --- 7. The election of 1828 brought in the first presidency of which political party? A. the Democrats B. the Democratic-Republicans C. the Republicans D. the Bucktails 8. What were the planks of Andrew Jackson’s campaign platform in 1828? 9. What was the significance of the Petticoat affair? 10. South Carolina threatened to nullify which federal act? A. the abolition of slavery B. the expansion of the transportation infrastructure C. the protective tariff on imported goods D. the rotation in office that expelled several federal officers 11. How did President Jackson respond to Congress’s re-chartering of the Second Bank of the United States? A. He vetoed it. B. He gave states the right to implement it or not. C. He signed it into law. D. He wrote a counterproposal. 12. Why did the Second Bank of the United States make such an inviting target for President Jackson? 13. What were the philosophies and policies of the new Whig Party? 14. How did most White people in the United States view Native Americans in the 1820s? A. as savages B. as being in touch with nature C. as enslaved people D. as shamans 15. The 1830 Indian Removal Act is best understood as ________. A. an example of President Jackson forcing Congress to pursue an unpopular policy B. an illustration of the widespread hatred of Native Americans during the Age of Jackson C. an example of laws designed to integrate Native Americans into American life D. an effort to deprive the Cherokee of their enslaved property 16. What was the Trail of Tears? 17. The winner of the 1840 election was ________. A. a Democrat B. a Democratic-Republican C. an Anti-Federalist D. a Whig 18. Which of the following did *not* characterize political changes in the 1830s? A. higher voter participation B. increasing political power of free Black voters C. stronger partisan ties D. political battles between Whigs and Democrats 19. How did Alexis de Tocqueville react to his visit to the United States? What impressed and what worried --- ## Critical Thinking Questions 20. What were some of the social and cultural beliefs that became widespread during the Age of Jackson? What lay behind these beliefs, and do you observe any of them in American culture today? 21. Were the political changes of the early nineteenth century positive or negative? Explain your opinion. 22. If you were defending the Cherokee and other native nations before the U.S. Supreme Court in the 1830s, what arguments would you make? If you were supporting Native American removal, what arguments would you make? 23. How did depictions of Native Americans in popular culture help to sway popular opinion? Does modern popular culture continue to wield this kind of power over us? Why or why not? 24. Does Alexis de Tocqueville’s argument about the tyranny of the majority reflect American democracy today? Provide examples to support your answer. --- 274 10 • Critical Thinking Questions Access for free at openstax.org --- # A Nation on the Move: Westward Expansion, 1800–1860 [FIGURE 11.1 In the first half of the nineteenth century, settlers began to move west of the Mississippi River in large numbers. In John Gast’s *American Progress* (ca. 1872), the figure of Columbia, representing the United States and the spirit of democracy, makes her way westward, literally bringing light to the darkness as she advances.] ## CHAPTER OUTLINE **11.1** Lewis and Clark **11.2** The Missouri Crisis **11.3** Independence for Texas **11.4** The Mexican-American War, 1846–1848 **11.5** Free or Slave Soil? The Dilemma of the West **INTRODUCTION** After 1800, the United States militantly expanded westward across North America, confident of its right and duty to gain control of the continent and spread the benefits of its “superior” culture. In John Gast’s *American Progress* (Figure 11.1), the White, blonde figure of Columbia—a historical personification of the United States—strides triumphantly westward with the Star of Empire on her head. She brings education, symbolized by the schoolbook, and modern technology, represented by the telegraph wire. White settlers follow her lead, driving the Native peoples away and bringing successive waves of technological progress in their wake. In the first half of the nineteenth century, the quest for control of the West led to the Louisiana Purchase, the annexation of Texas, and the Mexican-American War. Efforts to seize western territories from Native peoples and expand the republic by warring with Mexico succeeded beyond expectations. Few nations ever expanded so quickly. Yet, this expansion led to debates about the fate of slavery in the West, creating tensions between North and South that ultimately led to the collapse of American democracy and a brutal civil war. --- # 11.1 Lewis and Clark ### LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain the significance