with a set of four measures designed to punish Massachusetts, commonly known as the **Coercive Acts**. The Boston Port Act shut down Boston Harbor until the East India Company was repaid. The Massachusetts Government Act placed the colonial government under the direct control of crown officials and made traditional town meetings subject to the governor’s approval. The Administration of Justice Act allowed the royal governor to unilaterally move any trial of a crown officer out of Massachusetts, a change designed to prevent hostile Massachusetts juries from deciding these cases. This act was especially infuriating to John Adams and others who emphasized the time-honored rule of law. They saw --- this part of the Coercive Acts as striking at the heart of fair and equitable justice. Finally, the Quartering Act encompassed all the colonies and allowed British troops to be housed in occupied buildings. At the same time, Parliament also passed the Quebec Act, which expanded the boundaries of Quebec westward and extended religious tolerance to Roman Catholics in the province. For many Protestant colonists, especially Congregationalists in New England, this forced tolerance of Catholicism was the most objectionable provision of the act. Additionally, expanding the boundaries of Quebec raised troubling questions for many colonists who eyed the West, hoping to expand the boundaries of their provinces. The Quebec Act appeared gratuitous, a slap in the face to colonists already angered by the Coercive Acts. American Patriots renamed the Coercive and Quebec measures the **Intolerable Acts.** Some in London also thought the acts went too far; see the cartoon “The Able Doctor, or America Swallowing the Bitter Draught” (Figure 5.14) for one British view of what Parliament was doing to the colonies. Meanwhile, punishments designed to hurt only one colony (Massachusetts, in this case) had the effect of mobilizing all the colonies to its side. The Committees of Correspondence had already been active in coordinating an approach to the Tea Act. Now the talk would turn to these new, intolerable assaults on the colonists’ rights as British subjects. ---- **FIGURE 5.14** The artist of “The Able Doctor, or America Swallowing the Bitter Draught” (*London Magazine*, May 1, 1774) targets select members of Parliament as the perpetrators of a devilish scheme to overturn the constitution; this is why Mother Britannia weeps. Note that this cartoon came from a British publication; Great Britain was not united in support of Parliament’s policies toward the American colonies. # 5.5 Disaffection: The First Continental Congress and American Identity ### LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Describe the state of affairs between the colonies and the home government in 1774 * Explain the purpose and results of the First Continental Congress Disaffection—the loss of affection toward the home government—had reached new levels by 1774. Many colonists viewed the Intolerable Acts as a turning point; they now felt they had to take action. The result was the First Continental Congress, a direct challenge to Lord North and British authority in the colonies. Still, it would be a mistake to assume there was a groundswell of support for separating from the British Empire and creating a new, independent nation. Strong ties still bound the Empire together, and colonists did not agree about the proper response. Loyalists tended to be property holders, established residents who feared the loss of their property. To them the protests seemed to promise nothing but mob rule, and the violence and disorder they provoked were shocking. On both sides of the Atlantic, opinions varied. After the passage of the Intolerable Acts in 1774, the Committees of Correspondence and the Sons of Liberty went straight to work, spreading warnings about how the acts would affect the liberty of all colonists, not just urban merchants and laborers. The Massachusetts Government Act had shut down the colonial government --- there, but resistance-minded colonists began meeting in extralegal assemblies. One of these assemblies, the Massachusetts Provincial Congress, passed the **Suffolk Resolves** in September 1774, which laid out a plan of resistance to the Intolerable Acts. Meanwhile, the First Continental Congress was convening to discuss how to respond to the acts themselves. The First Continental Congress was made up of elected representatives of twelve of the thirteen American colonies. (Georgia’s royal governor blocked the move to send representatives from that colony, an indication of the continued strength of the royal government despite the crisis.) The representatives met in Philadelphia from September 5 through October 26, 1774, and at first they did not agree at all about the appropriate response to the Intolerable Acts. Joseph Galloway of Pennsylvania argued for a conciliatory approach; he proposed that an elected Grand Council in America, like the Parliament in Great Britain, should be paired with a royally appointed President General, who would represent the authority of the Crown. More radical factions argued for a move toward separation from the Crown. In the end, Paul Revere rode from Massachusetts to Philadelphia with the Suffolk Resolves, which became the basis of the Declaration and Resolves of the First Continental Congress. In the Declaration and Resolves, adopted on October 14, the colonists demanded the repeal of all repressive acts passed since 1773 and agreed to a non-importation, non-exportation, and non-consumption pact against all British goods until the acts were repealed. In the “Petition of Congress to the King” on October 24, the delegates adopted a further recommendation of the Suffolk Resolves and proposed that the colonies raise and regulate their own militias. The representatives at the First Continental Congress created a Continental Association to ensure that the full boycott was enforced across all the colonies. The Continental Association served as an umbrella group for colonial and local committees of observation and inspection. By taking these steps, the First Continental Congress established a governing network in opposition to royal authority. ---- ### CLICK AND EXPLORE Visit the Massachusetts Historical Society (https://openstax.org/l/firstcongress) to see a digitized copy and read the transcript of the First Continental Congress’s petition to King George. ---- <div style="background:#b28c4a; color:#fff; font-weight:bold; padding:5px; margin-top:20px; margin-bottom:10px;"> DEFINING AMERICAN </div> **The First List of Un-American Activities** In her book *Toward A More Perfect Union: Virtue and the Formation of American Republics*, historian Ann Fairfax Withington explores actions the delegates to the First Continental Congress took during the weeks they were together. Along with their efforts to bring about the repeal of the Intolerable Acts, the delegates also banned certain activities they believed would undermine their fight against what they saw as British corruption. In particular, the delegates prohibited horse races, cockfights, the theater, and elaborate funerals. The reasons for these prohibitions provide insight into the state of affairs in 1774. Both horse races and cockfights encouraged gambling and, for the delegates, gambling threatened to prevent the unity of action and purpose they desired. In addition, cockfighting appeared immoral and corrupt because the roosters were fitted with razors and fought to the death (Figure 5.15). --- **FIGURE 5.15** Cockfights, as depicted in *The Cockpit* (1759) by British artist and engraver William Hogarth, were among the entertainments the First Continental Congress sought to outlaw, considering them un-American. The ban on the theater aimed to do away with another corrupt British practice. Critics had long believed that theatrical performances drained money from working people. Moreover, they argued, theatergoers learned to lie and deceive from what they saw on stage. The delegates felt banning the theater would demonstrate their resolve to act honestly and without pretence in their fight against corruption. Finally, eighteenth-century mourning practices often required lavish spending on luxury items and even the employment of professional mourners who, for a price, would shed tears at the grave. Prohibiting these practices reflected the idea that luxury bred corruption, and the First Continental Congress wanted to demonstrate that the colonists would do without British vices. Congress emphasized the need to be frugal and self-sufficient when confronted with corruption. The First Continental Congress banned all four activities—horse races, cockfights, the theater, and elaborate funerals—and entrusted the Continental Association with enforcement. Rejecting what they saw as corruption coming from Great Britain, the delegates were also identifying themselves as standing apart from their British relatives. They cast themselves as virtuous defenders of liberty against a corrupt Parliament. In the Declaration and Resolves and the Petition of Congress to the King, the delegates to the First Continental Congress refer to George III as “Most Gracious Sovereign” and to themselves as “inhabitants of the English colonies in North America” or “inhabitants of British America,” indicating that they still considered themselves British subjects of the king, not American citizens. At the same time, however, they were slowly moving away from British authority, creating their own de facto government in the First Continental Congress. One of the provisions of the Congress was that it meet again in one year to mark its progress; the Congress was becoming an elected government. --- # Key Terms **Boston Massacre** a confrontation between a crowd of Bostonians and British soldiers on March 5, 1770, which resulted in the deaths of five people, including Crispus Attucks, the first official casualty in the war for independence **Coercive Acts** four acts (Administration of Justice Act, Massachusetts Government Act, Port Act, Quartering Act) that Lord North passed to punish Massachusetts for destroying the tea and refusing to pay for the damage **Committees of Correspondence** colonial extralegal shadow governments that convened to coordinate plans of resistance against the British **Daughters of Liberty** well-born British colonial women who led a non-importation movement against British goods **direct tax** a tax that consumers pay directly, rather than through merchants’ higher prices **indirect tax** a tax imposed on businesses, rather than directly on consumers **Intolerable Acts** the name American Patriots gave to the Coercive Acts and the Quebec Act **Loyalists** colonists in America who were loyal to Great Britain **Massachusetts Circular** a letter penned by Son of Liberty Samuel Adams that laid out the unconstitutionality of taxation without representation and encouraged the other colonies to boycott British goods **no taxation without representation** the principle, first articulated in the Virginia Stamp Act Resolutions, that the colonists needed to be represented in Parliament if they were to be taxed **non-importation movement** a widespread colonial boycott of British goods **Proclamation Line** a line along the Appalachian Mountains, imposed by the Proclamation of 1763, west of which British colonists could not settle **Sons of Liberty** artisans, shopkeepers, and small-time merchants who opposed the Stamp Act and considered themselves British patriots **Suffolk Resolves** a Massachusetts plan of resistance to the Intolerable Acts that formed the basis of the eventual plan adopted by the First Continental Congress for resisting the British, including the arming of militias and the adoption of a widespread non-importation, non-exportation, and non-consumption agreement **vice-admiralty courts** British royal courts without juries that settled disputes occurring at sea # Summary ### 5.1 Confronting the National Debt: The Aftermath of the French and Indian War The British Empire had gained supremacy in North America with its victory over the French in 1763. Almost all of the North American territory east of the Mississippi fell under Great Britain’s control, and British leaders took this opportunity to try to create a more coherent and unified empire after decades of lax oversight. Victory over the French had proved very costly, and the British government attempted to better regulate their expanded empire in North America. The initial steps the British took in 1763 and 1764 raised suspicions among some colonists about the intent of the home government. These suspicions would grow and swell over the coming years. ### 5.2 The Stamp Act and the Sons and Daughters of Liberty Though Parliament designed the 1765 Stamp Act to deal with the financial crisis in the Empire, it had unintended consequences. Outrage over the act created a degree of unity among otherwise unconnected American colonists, giving them a chance to act together both politically and socially. The crisis of the Stamp Act allowed colonists to loudly proclaim their identity as defenders of British liberty. With the repeal of the Stamp Act in 1766, liberty-loving subjects of the king celebrated what they viewed as a victory. ### 5.3 The Townshend Acts and Colonial Protest Like the Stamp Act in 1765, the Townshend Acts led many colonists to work together against what they --- perceived to be an unconstitutional measure, generating the second major crisis in British Colonial America. The experience of resisting the Townshend Acts provided another shared experience among colonists from diverse regions and backgrounds, while the partial repeal convinced many that liberty had once again been defended. Nonetheless, Great Britain’s debt crisis still had not been solved. ### 5.4 The Destruction of the Tea and the Coercive Acts The colonial rejection of the Tea Act, especially the destruction of the tea in Boston Harbor, recast the decade-long argument between British colonists and the home government as an intolerable conspiracy against liberty and an excessive overreach of parliamentary power. The Coercive Acts were punitive in nature, awakening the worst fears of otherwise loyal members of the British Empire in America. ### 5.5 Disaffection: The First Continental Congress and American Identity The First Continental Congress, which comprised elected representatives from twelve of the thirteen American colonies, represented a direct challenge to British authority. In its Declaration and Resolves, colonists demanded the repeal of all repressive acts passed since 1773. The delegates also recommended that the colonies raise militias, lest the British respond to the Congress’s proposed boycott of British goods with force. While the colonists still considered themselves British subjects, they were slowly retreating from British authority, creating their own de facto government via the First Continental Congress. # Review Questions 1. Which of the following was a cause of the British National Debt in 1763? A. drought in Great Britain B. the French and Indian War C. the continued British military presence in the American colonies D. both B and C 2. What was the main purpose of the Sugar Act of 1764? A. It raised taxes on sugar. B. It raised taxes on molasses. C. It strengthened enforcement of molasses smuggling laws. D. It required colonists to purchase only sugar distilled in Great Britain. 3. What did British colonists find so onerous about the acts that Prime Minister Grenville passed? 4. Which of the following was *not* a goal of the Stamp Act? A. to gain control over the colonists B. to raise revenue for British troops stationed in the colonies C. to raise revenue to pay off British debt from the French and Indian War D. to declare null and void any laws the colonies had passed to govern and tax themselves 5. For which of the following activities were the Sons of Liberty responsible? A. the Stamp Act Congress B. the hanging and beheading of a stamp commissioner in effigy C. the massacre of Conestoga in Pennsylvania D. the introduction of the Virginia Stamp Act Resolutions 6. Which of the following was *not* one of the goals of the Townshend Acts? A. higher taxes B. greater colonial unity C. greater British control over the colonies --- D. reduced power of the colonial governments 7. Which event was most responsible for the colonies’ endorsement of Samuel Adams’s Massachusetts Circular? A. the Townshend Duties B. the Indemnity Act C. the Boston Massacre D. Lord Hillsborough’s threat to dissolve the colonial assemblies that endorsed the letter 8. What factors contributed to the Boston Massacre? 9. Which of the following is true of the Gaspée affair? A. Colonists believed that the British response represented an overreach of power. B. It was the first time colonists attacked a revenue ship. C. It was the occasion of the first official death in the war for independence. D. The ship’s owner, John Hancock, was a respectable Boston merchant. 10. What was the purpose of the Tea Act of 1773? A. to punish the colonists for their boycotting of British tea B. to raise revenue to offset the British national debt C. to help revive the struggling East India Company D. to pay the salaries of royal appointees 11. What was the significance of the Committees of Correspondence? 12. Which of the following was decided at the First Continental Congress? A. to declare war on Great Britain B. to boycott all British goods and prepare for possible military action C. to offer a conciliatory treaty to Great Britain D. to pay for the tea that was dumped in Boston Harbor 13. Which colony provided the basis for the Declarations and Resolves? A. Massachusetts B. Philadelphia C. Rhode Island D. New York ### Critical Thinking Questions 14. Was reconciliation between the American colonies and Great Britain possible in 1774? Why or why not? 15. Look again at the painting that opened this chapter: *The Bostonians Paying the Excise-man, or Tarring and Feathering* (Figure 5.1). How does this painting represent the relationship between Great Britain and the American colonies in the years from 1763 to 1774? 16. Why did the colonists react so much more strongly to the Stamp Act than to the Sugar Act? How did the principles that the Stamp Act raised continue to provide points of contention between colonists and the British government? 17. History is filled with unintended consequences. How do the British government’s attempts to control and regulate the colonies during this tumultuous era provide a case in point? How did the aims of the British measure up against the results of their actions? 18. What evidence indicates that colonists continued to think of themselves as British subjects throughout --- this era? What evidence suggests that colonists were beginning to forge a separate, collective “American” identity? How would you explain this shift? --- 138 5 • Critical Thinking Questions Access for free at openstax.org --- # America's War for Independence, 1775-1783 [The image shows the famous 1819 painting by John Trumbull depicting members of the committee entrusted with drafting the Declaration of Independence presenting their work to the Continental Congress in 1776. British flags are visible on the wall behind them.] **FIGURE 6.1** This famous 1819 painting by John Trumbull shows members of the committee entrusted with drafting the Declaration of Independence presenting their work to the Continental Congress in 1776. Note the British flags on the wall. Separating from the British Empire proved to be very difficult as the colonies and the Empire were linked with strong cultural, historical, and economic bonds forged over several generations. ## CHAPTER OUTLINE * **6.1** Britain’s Law-and-Order Strategy and Its Consequences * **6.2** The Early Years of the Revolution * **6.3** War in the South * **6.4** Identity during the American Revolution ## INTRODUCTION By the 1770s, Great Britain ruled a vast empire, with its American colonies producing useful raw materials and profitably consuming British goods. From Britain’s perspective, it was inconceivable that the colonies would wage a successful war for independence; in 1776, they appeared weak and disorganized, no match for the Empire. Yet, although the Revolutionary War did indeed drag on for eight years, in 1783, the thirteen colonies, now the United States, ultimately prevailed against the British. The Revolution succeeded because colonists from diverse economic and social backgrounds united in their opposition to Great Britain. Although thousands of colonists remained loyal to the crown and many others preferred to remain neutral, a sense of community against a common enemy prevailed among Patriots. The signing of the Declaration of Independence (Figure 6.1) exemplifies the spirit of that common cause. Representatives asserted: > “That these United Colonies are, and of Right ought to be Free and Independent States; that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the British Crown, . . . And for the support of this Declaration, . . . we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred Honor.” --- # 6.1 Britain’s Law-and-Order Strategy and Its Consequences ### LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain how Great Britain’s response to the destruction of a British shipment of tea in Boston Harbor in 1773 set the stage for the Revolution * Describe the beginnings of the American Revolution <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="5"> </th> </tr> <tr> <th>1775</th> <th>1776</th> <th>1777</th> <th>1781</th> <th>1783</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td> <b>Battles of Lexington and Concord; British win costly victory at Battle of Bunker Hill</b> </td> <td> <b>Thomas Paine publishes</b><br> Common Sense;<br> Continental Congress signs Declaration of Independence in July </td> <td> <b>American forces defeat General Burgoyne at the Battle of Saratoga</b> </td> <td> <b>Lord Cornwallis surrenders to American and French forces at Yorktown</b> </td> <td> <b>The United States and Great Britain sign the Treaty of Paris</b> </td> </tr> </tbody> </table> **FIGURE 6.2** Great Britain pursued a policy of law and order when dealing with the crises in the colonies in the late 1760s and 1770s. Relations between the