B. Anthony, agreed (Figure 13.18). [The image shows two portraits side by side: (a) A black-and-white photograph of Elizabeth Cady Stanton holding two children. (b) A painted portrait of Lucretia Mott wearing a white shawl.] **FIGURE 13.18** Elizabeth Cady Stanton (a) and Lucretia Mott (b) both emerged from the abolitionist movement as strong advocates of women’s rights. In 1848, about three hundred male and female feminists, many of them veterans of the abolition campaign, gathered at the **Seneca Falls** Convention in New York for a conference on women’s rights that was organized by Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. It was the first of what became annual meetings that have continued to the present day. Attendees agreed to a “Declaration of Rights and Sentiments” based on the Declaration of Independence; it declared, > “We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” > “The history of mankind,” the document continued, “is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her.” ---- ### CLICK AND EXPLORE Read the entire text of the Declaration of Rights and Sentiments in the Internet Modern History Sourcebook at Fordham University. ---- ### DEFINING AMERICAN **Sojourner Truth, "Ain't I A Woman?"** Born into slavery with the name Isabella Baumfree, Sojourner Truth gained her freedom in 1826 and devoted --- much of the rest of her life to championing the causes of abolition and women’s rights. She became the first Black woman to win a lawsuit against a White person when she sued to gain the freedom of her son. Supported by leaders such as Frederick Douglass and William Lloyd Garrison, Truth became a powerful voice in the abolition movement. But she was not afraid to challenge the prevailing notions about the rights and priorities of men and women within the abolition movement, nor did she avoid challenging the notions about Black people’s priority within the women’s rights movement. While some advocated with a step-by-step approach—first White women’s suffrage, then Black women’s suffrage—Truth disagreed. In 1851, Truth delivered a speech at the Women’s Rights Convention in Akron, Ohio. Ultimately, it came to be titled “Ain’t I a Woman.” One of the most famous transcriptions of this speech was published in an 1851 edition of the *Anti-Slavery Bugle* by Reverend Marius Robinson, an Ohio abolitionist who had worked with Truth. Another was published in an 1863 edition of the *Anti-Slavery Standard* by Frances Dana Gage, an abolitionist and feminist who presided over the convention at which Truth spoke. I have as much muscle as any man, and can do as much work as any man. I have plowed and reaped and husked and chopped and mowed, and can any man do more than that? I have heard much about the sexes being equal; I can carry as much as any man, and can eat as much too, if I can get it. I am strong as any man that is now. As for intellect, all I can say is, if woman have a pint and man a quart—why can’t she have her little pint full? You need not be afraid to give us our rights for fear we will take too much—for we won’t take more than our pint’ll hold. The poor men seem to be all in confusion and don’t know what to do. Why children, if you have woman’s rights give it to her and you will feel better. You will have your own rights, and they won’t be so much trouble. I can’t read, but I can hear. I have heard the Bible and have learned that Eve caused man to sin. Well if woman upset the world, do give her a chance to set it right side up again. What might be the reasons for the different versions of Truth’s speech? Could the different publishers have had different motivations? What is Truth’s theme in this speech? --- # Key Terms **abolitionist** a believer in the complete elimination of slavery **colonization** the strategy of moving African Americans out of the United States, usually to Africa **immediatism** the moral demand to take immediate action against slavery to bring about its end **millennialism** the belief that the Kingdom of God would be established on earth and that God would reign on earth for a thousand years characterized by harmony and Christian morality **moral suasion** an abolitionist technique of appealing to the consciences of the public, especially slaveholders **Mormons** members of an American denomination of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints that emphasized patriarchal leadership **phrenology** the mapping of the mind to specific human attributes, later considered pseudoscience **pietistic** the stressing of stressed transformative individual religious experience or piety over religious rituals and formality **Second Great Awakening** a revival of evangelical Protestantism in the early nineteenth century **Seneca Falls** the location of the first American conference on women’s rights and the signing of the “Declaration of Rights and Sentiments” in 1848 **Shakers** a religious sect that emphasized communal living and celibacy **teetotalism** complete abstinence from all alcohol **temperance** a social movement encouraging moderation or self-restraint in the consumption of alcoholic beverages **transcendentalism** the belief that all people can attain an understanding of the world that transcends rational, sensory experience # Summary ## 13.1 An Awakening of Religion and Individualism Evangelical Protestantism pervaded American culture in the antebellum era and fueled a belief in the possibility of changing society for the better. Leaders of the Second Great Awakening like Charles G. Finney urged listeners to take charge of their own salvation. This religious message dovetailed with the new economic possibilities created by the market and Industrial Revolution, making the Protestantism of the Second Great Awakening, with its emphasis on individual spiritual success, a reflection of the individualistic, capitalist spirit of the age. Transcendentalists took a different approach, but like their religiously oriented brethren, they too looked to create a better existence. These authors, most notably Emerson, identified a major tension in American life between the effort to be part of the democratic majority and the need to remain true to oneself as an individual. ## 13.2 Antebellum Communal Experiments Reformers who engaged in communal experiments aimed to recast economic and social relationships by introducing innovations designed to create a more stable and equitable society. Their ideas found many expressions, from early socialist experiments (such as by the Fourierists and the Owenites) to the dreams of the New England intellectual elite (such as Brook Farm). The Second Great Awakening also prompted many religious utopias, like those of the Rappites and Shakers. By any measure, the Mormons emerged as the most successful of these. ## 13.3 Reforms to Human Health Reformers targeted vices that corrupted the human body and society: the individual and the national soul. For many, alcohol appeared to be the most destructive and widespread. Indeed, in the years before the Civil War, the United States appeared to be a republic of drunkenness to many. To combat this national substance abuse problem, reformers created a host of temperance organizations that first targeted the middle and upper classes, and then the working classes. Thanks to Sylvester Graham and other health reformers, exercise and fresh air, combined with a good diet, became fashionable. Phrenologists focused on revealing the secrets of the --- mind and personality. In a fast-paced world, phrenology offered the possibility of knowing different human characteristics. ### 13.4 Addressing Slavery Contrasting proposals were put forth to deal with slavery. Reformers in the antebellum United States addressed the thorny issue of slavery through contrasting proposals that offered profoundly different solutions to the dilemma of the institution. Many leading American statesmen, including slaveholders, favored colonization, relocating Black Americans to Africa, which abolitionists scorned. Slave rebellions sought the end of the institution through its violent overthrow, a tactic that horrified many in the North and the South. Abolitionists, especially those who followed William Lloyd Garrison, provoked equally strong reactions by envisioning a new United States without slavery, where Black people and White people stood on equal footing. Opponents saw abolition as the worst possible reform, a threat to all order and decency. Slaveholders, in particular, saw slavery as a positive aspect of American society, one that reformed the lives of enslaved people by exposing them to civilization and religion. ### 13.5 Women’s Rights The spirit of religious awakening and reform in the antebellum era impacted women lives by allowing them to think about their lives and their society in new and empowering ways. Of all the various antebellum reforms, however, abolition played a significant role in generating the early feminist movement in the United States. Although this early phase of American feminism did not lead to political rights for women, it began the long process of overcoming gender inequalities in the republic. ## Review Questions 1. Which of the following is *not* a characteristic of the Second Great Awakening? A. greater emphasis on nature B. greater emphasis on religious education of children C. greater church attendance D. belief in the possibility of a better world 2. Transcendentalists were most concerned with ________. A. the afterlife B. predestination C. the individual D. democracy 3. What do the Second Great Awakening and transcendentalism have in common? 4. Which religious community focused on the power of patriarchy? A. Shakers B. Mormons C. Owenites D. Rappites 5. Which community or movement is associated with transcendentalism? A. the Oneida Community B. the Ephrata Cloister C. Brook Farm D. Fourierism 6. How were the reform communities of the antebellum era treated by the general population? --- 7. The first temperance laws were enacted by ________. A. state governments B. local governments C. the federal government D. temperance organizations 8. Sylvester Graham’s reformers targeted ________. A. the human body B. nutrition C. sexuality D. all of the above 9. Whom did temperance reformers target? 10. In the context of the antebellum era, what does colonization refer to? A. Great Britain’s colonization of North America B. the relocation of African Americans to Africa C. American colonization of the Caribbean D. American colonization of Africa 11. Which of the following did William Lloyd Garrison *not* employ in his abolitionist efforts? A. moral suasion B. immediatism C. political involvement D. pamphleteering 12. Why did William Lloyd Garrison’s endorsement of the Grimké sisters divide the abolitionist movement? A. They advocated equal rights for women. B. They supported colonization. C. They attended the Seneca Falls Convention. D. They lectured to co-ed audiences. 13. Which female reformer focused on women’s roles as the educators of children? A. Lydia Maria Child B. Sarah Grimké C. Catherine Beecher D. Susan B. Anthony 14. How did the abolitionist movement impact the women’s movement? ### Critical Thinking Questions 15. In what ways did the Second Great Awakening and transcendentalism reflect and react to the changes in antebellum American thought and culture? 16. What did the antebellum communal projects have in common? How did the ones most influenced by religion differ from those that had other influences? 17. In what ways do temperance, health reforms, and phrenology offer reflections on the changes in the United States before the Civil War? What needs did these reforms fill in the lives of antebellum Americans? 18. Of the various approaches to the problem of slavery, which one do you find to be the most effective and --- 19. In what ways were antebellum feminists radical? In what ways were they traditional? --- # Troubled Times: the Tumultuous 1850s **FIGURE 14.1** In *Southern Chivalry: Argument versus Club’s* (1856), by John Magee, South Carolinian Preston Brooks attacks Massachusetts senator Charles Sumner after his speech denouncing “border ruffians” pouring into Kansas from Missouri. For southerners, defending slavery meant defending southern honor. ## CHAPTER OUTLINE **14.1** The Compromise of 1850 **14.2** The Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Republican Party **14.3** The Dred Scott Decision and Sectional Strife **14.4** John Brown and the Election of 1860 ## INTRODUCTION The heated sectional controversy between the North and the South reached new levels of intensity in the 1850s. Southerners and northerners grew ever more antagonistic as they debated the expansion of slavery in the West. The notorious confrontation between Representative Preston Brooks of South Carolina and Massachusetts senator Charles Sumner depicted in the image above (Figure 14.1), illustrates the contempt between extremists on both sides. The “Caning of Sumner” in May 1856 followed upon a speech given by Sumner two days earlier in which he condemned slavery in no uncertain terms, declaring: “[Admitting Kansas as a slave state] is the rape of a virgin territory, compelling it to the hateful embrace of slavery; and it may be clearly traced to a depraved longing for a new slave state, the hideous offspring of such a crime, in the hope of adding to the power of slavery in the national government.” Sumner criticized proslavery legislators, particularly attacking a fellow senator and relative of Preston Brooks. Brooks responded by beating Sumner with a cane, a thrashing that southerners celebrated as a manly defense of gentlemanly honor and their way of life. The episode highlights the violent clash between pro- and antislavery factions in the 1850s, a conflict that would eventually lead to the traumatic unraveling of American democracy and civil war. --- # 14.1 The Compromise of 1850 ### LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain the contested issues that led to the Compromise of 1850 * Describe and analyze the reactions to the 1850 Fugitive Slave Act <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">FIGURE 14.2</th> </tr> <tr> <th>1850<br><i>Henry Clay brokers Compromise of 1850</i></th> <th>1852<br><i>Harriet Beecher Stowe publishes Uncle Tom’s Cabin</i></th> <th>1854<br><i>Anti-slavery Whigs, Democrats, and Free-Soilers form Republican Party; Congress passes Kansas-Nebraska Act</i></th> <th>1856<br><i>Preston Brooks canes Charles Sumner</i></th> <th>1857<br><i>Supreme Court hands down Dred Scott decision</i></th> <th>1858<br><i>Abraham Lincoln and Stephen Douglas debate in Illinois</i></th> <th>1859<br><i>John Brown raids Harpers Ferry</i></th> <th>1860<br><i>Lincoln elected president</i></th> </tr> </table> At the end of the Mexican-American War, the United States gained a large expanse of western territory known as the Mexican Cession. The disposition of this new territory was in question; would the new states be slave states or free-soil states? In the long run, the Mexican-American War achieved what abolitionism alone had failed to do: it mobilized many in the North against slavery. Antislavery northerners clung to the idea expressed in the 1846 Wilmot Proviso: slavery would not expand into the areas taken, and later bought, from Mexico. Though the proviso remained a proposal and never became a law, it defined the sectional division. The Free-Soil Party, which formed at the conclusion of the Mexican-American War in 1848 and included many members of the failed Liberty Party, made this position the centerpiece of all its political activities, ensuring that the issue of slavery and its expansion remained at the front and center of American political debate. Supporters of the Wilmot Proviso and members of the new Free-Soil Party did not want to abolish slavery in the states where it already existed; rather, Free-Soil advocates demanded that the western territories be kept free of slavery for the benefit of White laborers who might settle there. They wanted to protect White workers from having to compete with slave labor in the West. (Abolitionists, in contrast, looked to destroy slavery everywhere in the United States.) Southern extremists, especially wealthy slaveholders, reacted with outrage at this effort to limit slavery’s expansion. They argued for the right to bring their enslaved property west, and they vowed to leave the Union if necessary to protect their way of life—meaning the right to enslave people—and ensure that the American empire of slavery would continue to grow. ### BROKERING THE COMPROMISE The issue of what to do with the western territories added to the republic by the Mexican Cession consumed Congress in 1850. Other controversial matters, which had been simmering over time, complicated the problem further. Chief among these issues were the slave trade in the District of Columbia, which antislavery advocates hoped to end, and the fugitive slave laws, which southerners wanted to strengthen. The border between Texas and New Mexico remained contested because many Texans hoped to enlarge their state further, and, finally, --- the issue of California had not been resolved. California was the crown jewel of the Mexican Cession, and following the discovery of gold, it was flush with thousands of emigrants. By most estimates, however, it would be a free state, since the former Mexican ban on slavery still remained in force and slavery had not taken root in California. The map below (Figure 14.3) shows the disposition of land before the 1850 compromise. <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">States and Territories of the United States of America<br>March 3, 1849–September 9, 1850</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td colspan="2">Oregon Territory</td> <td colspan="2" rowspan="3">Mexican Cession (Unorganized territory)</td> <td>WI</td> <td>MI</td> <td>ME</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="2">Minnesota Territory</td> <td>IA</td> <td>IL</td> <td>VT</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Unorganized Territory</td> <td>MO</td> <td>IN</td> <td>OH</td> <td>NH</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="2"></td> <td>AR</td> <td>TX</td> <td>KY</td> <td>PA</td> <td>MA</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="2"></td> <td>LA</td> <td>MS</td> <td>TN</td> <td>VA</td> <td>RI</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="2"></td> <td>AL</td> <td>GA</td> <td>NC</td> <td>DE</td> <td>CT</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="2"></td> <td>SC</td> <td>FL</td> <td>MD</td> <td>NJ</td> <td></td> </tr> </tbody> <tfoot> <tr> <td colspan="7"> * Territories (green)<br> * Mexico (blue)<br> * Slave states (purple)<br> * Non-slave states (orange) </td> </tr> </tfoot> </table> **FIGURE 14.3** This map shows the states and territories of the United States as they were in 1849–1850. (credit “User:Golbez”/Wikimedia Commons) The presidential election of 1848 did little to solve the problems resulting from the Mexican Cession. Both the Whigs and the Democrats attempted to avoid addressing the issue of slavery publicly as much as possible. The Democrats nominated Lewis Cass of Michigan, a supporter of the idea of popular sovereignty, or letting the people in the territories decide the issue of whether or not to permit slavery based on majority rule. The Whigs nominated General Zachary Taylor, a slaveholder from Louisiana, who had achieved national prominence as a military hero in the Mexican-American War. Taylor did not take a personal stand on any issue and remained silent throughout the campaign. The fledgling Free-Soil Party put forward former president Martin Van Buren as their candidate. The Free-Soil Party attracted northern Democrats who supported the Wilmot Proviso, northern Whigs who rejected Taylor because he was a slaveholder, former members of the Liberty Party, and other abolitionists. Both the