or by another. The Federalists, particularly John Jay, Alexander Hamilton, and James Madison, put their case to the public in a famous series of essays known as *The Federalist Papers*. These were first published in New York and subsequently republished elsewhere in the United States. ---- ### DEFINING AMERICAN **James Madison on the Benefits of Republicanism** The tenth essay in *The Federalist Papers*, often called Federalist No. 10, is one of the most famous. Written by James Madison (Figure 7.16), it addresses the problems of political parties (“factions”). Madison argued that there were two approaches to solving the problem of political parties: a republican government and a democracy. He argued that a large republic provided the best defense against what he viewed as the tumult of direct democracy. Compromises would be reached in a large republic and citizens would be represented by representatives of their own choosing. --- **FIGURE 7.16** John Vanderlyn’s 1816 portrait depicts James Madison, one of the leading Federalists who supported the 1787 Constitution. > From this view of the subject, it may be concluded, that a pure Democracy, by which I mean a Society consisting of a small number of citizens, who assemble and administer the Government in person, can admit of no cure for the mischiefs of faction. A common passion or interest will, in almost every case, be felt by a majority of the whole; a communication and concert result from the form of Government itself; and there is nothing to check the inducements to sacrifice the weaker party, or an obnoxious individual. Hence it is, that such Democracies have ever been spectacles of turbulence and contention; have ever been found incompatible with personal security, or the rights of property; and have in general been as short in their lives, as they have been violent in their deaths. Theoretic politicians, who have patronized this species of Government, have erroneously supposed, that by reducing mankind to a perfect equality in their political rights, they would, at the same time, be perfectly equalized and assimilated in their possessions, their opinions, and their passions. > A Republic, by which I mean a Government in which the scheme of representation takes place, opens a different prospect, and promises the cure for which we are seeking. Let us examine the points in which it varies from pure Democracy, and we shall comprehend both the nature of the cure, and the efficacy which it must derive from the Union. > The two great points of difference, between a Democracy and a Republic, are, first, the delegation of the Government, in the latter, to a small number of citizens elected by the rest: Secondly, the greater number of citizens, and greater sphere of country, over which the latter may be extended. Does Madison recommend republicanism or democracy as the best form of government? What arguments does he use to prove his point? ---- ### CLICK AND EXPLORE Read the full text of Federalist No. 10 at Yale Law School’s Avalon Project. What do you think are Madison’s most and least compelling arguments? How would different members of the new United States view his arguments? ---- Including all the state ratifying conventions around the country, a total of fewer than two thousand men voted on whether to adopt the new plan of government. In the end, the Constitution only narrowly won approval (**Figure 7.17**). In New York, the vote was thirty in favor to twenty-seven opposed. In Massachusetts, the vote to approve was 187 to 168, and some claim supporters of the Constitution resorted to bribes in order to ensure --- approval. Virginia ratified by a vote of eighty-nine to seventy-nine, and Rhode Island by thirty-four to thirty-two. The opposition to the Constitution reflected the fears that a new national government, much like the British monarchy, created too much centralized power and, as a result, deprived citizens in the various states of the ability to make their own decisions. <table> <tr> <td> FIGURE 7.17 The first page of the 1787 United States Constitution, shown here, begins: “We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.” </td> </tr> </table> --- # Key Terms **Anti-Federalists** those who opposed the 1787 Constitution and favored stronger individual states **bicameral** having two legislative houses, an upper and a lower house **checks and balances** the system that ensures a balance of power among the branches of government **Connecticut Compromise** also known as the Great Compromise, Roger Sherman’s proposal at the Constitutional Convention for a bicameral legislature, with the upper house having equal representation for all states and the lower house having proportional representation **conservative Whigs** the politically and economically elite revolutionary class that wanted to limit political participation to a few powerful families **coverture** the legal status of married women in the United States, which included complete legal and economic dependence on husbands **democracy** a system of government in which the majority rules **Electoral College** the mechanism by which electors, based on the number of representatives from each state, choose the president **Federalists** those who supported the 1787 Constitution and a strong central government; these advocates of the new national government formed the ruling political party in the 1790s **majority rule** a fundamental principle of democracy, providing that the majority should have the power to make decisions binding upon the whole **manumission** the releasing of an enslaved person by his or her owner **monarchy** a form of government with a monarch at its head **proportional representation** representation that gives more populous states greater political power by allowing them more representatives **radical Whigs** revolutionaries who favored broadening participation in the political process **three-fifths compromise** the agreement at the Constitutional Convention that three out of every five enslaved persons would be counted when determining a state's population for purposes of representation **unicameral** having a single house (of legislative government) # Summary ## 7.1 Common Sense: From Monarchy to an American Republic The guiding principle of republicanism was that the people themselves would appoint or select the leaders who would represent them. The debate over how much democracy (majority rule) to incorporate in the governing of the new United States raised questions about who was best qualified to participate in government and have the right to vote. Revolutionary leaders argued that property holders had the greatest stake in society and favored a republic that would limit political rights to property holders. In this way, republicanism exhibited a bias toward the elite. George Washington served as a role model for the new republic, embodying the exceptional talent and public virtue prized in its political and social philosophy. ## 7.2 How Much Revolutionary Change? After the Revolution, the balance of power between women and men and between White, Black, and Native American people remained largely unchanged. Yet revolutionary principles, including the call for universal equality in the Declaration of Independence, inspired and emboldened many. Abigail Adams and others pressed for greater rights for women, while the Pennsylvania Abolition Society and New York Manumission Society worked toward the abolition of slavery. Nonetheless, for Black people, women, and Native peoples, the revolutionary ideals of equality fell far short of reality. In the new republic, full citizenship—including the right to vote—did not extend to non-White people or to women. ## 7.3 Debating Democracy The late 1770s and 1780s witnessed one of the most creative political eras as each state drafted its own constitution. The Articles of Confederation, a weak national league among the states, reflected the dominant --- view that power should be located in the states and not in a national government. However, neither the state governments nor the Confederation government could solve the enormous economic problems resulting from the long and costly Revolutionary War. The economic crisis led to Shays’ Rebellion by residents of western Massachusetts, and to the decision to revise the Confederation government. ### 7.4 The Constitutional Convention and Federal Constitution The economic crisis of the 1780s, shortcomings of the Articles of Confederation, and outbreak of Shays’ Rebellion spurred delegates from twelve of the thirteen states to gather for the Constitutional Convention of 1787. Although the stated purpose of the convention was to modify the Articles of Confederation, their mission shifted to the building of a new, strong federal government. Federalists like James Madison and Alexander Hamilton led the charge for a new United States Constitution, the document that endures as the oldest written constitution in the world, a testament to the work done in 1787 by the delegates in Philadelphia. **Review Questions** 1. To what form of government did the American revolutionaries turn after the war for independence? A. republicanism B. monarchy C. democracy D. oligarchy 2. Which of the following was not one of Franklin’s thirteen virtues? A. sincerity B. temperance C. mercy D. tranquility 3. What defined republicanism as a social philosophy? 4. Which of the following figures did *not* actively challenge the status of women in the early American republic? A. Abigail Adams B. Phillis Wheatley C. Mercy Otis Warren D. Judith Sargent Murray 5. Which state had the clearest separation of church and state? A. New Hampshire B. Pennsylvania C. Virginia D. New York 6. How would you characterize Thomas Jefferson’s ideas on race and slavery? 7. Which of the following states had the most democratic constitution in the 1780s? A. Pennsylvania B. Massachusetts C. South Carolina D. Maryland 8. Under the Articles of Confederation, what power did the national Confederation Congress have? A. the power to tax --- B. the power to enforce foreign treaties C. the power to enforce commercial trade agreements D. the power to create land ordinances **9.** What were the primary causes of Shays’ Rebellion? **10.** Which plan resolved the issue of representation for the U.S. Constitution? A. the Rhode Island Agreement B. the New Jersey Plan C. the Connecticut Compromise D. the Virginia Plan **11.** How was the U.S. Constitution ratified? A. by each state at special ratifying conventions B. at the Constitutional Convention of 1787 C. at the Confederation Convention D. by popular referendum in each state **12.** Explain the argument that led to the three-fifths rule and the consequences of that rule. ### Critical Thinking Questions **13.** Describe the state constitutions that were more democratic and those that were less so. What effect would these different constitutions have upon those states? Who could participate in government, whether by voting or by holding public office? Whose interests were represented, and whose were compromised? **14.** In what ways does the United States Constitution manifest the principles of both republican and democratic forms of government? In what ways does it deviate from those principles? **15.** In this chapter’s discussion of New York’s ratifying convention, Alexander Hamilton takes issue with Anti-Federalist delegate Melancton Smith’s assertion that (as Hamilton says) “a pure democracy, if it were practicable, would be the most perfect government.” What did Smith—and Hamilton—mean by “a pure democracy”? How does this compare to the type of democracy that represents the modern United States? **16.** Describe popular attitudes toward African Americans, women, and Native Americans in the wake of the Revolution. In what ways did the established social and political order depend upon keeping members of these groups in their circumscribed roles? If those roles were to change, how would American society and politics have had to adjust? **17.** How did the process of creating and ratifying the Constitution, and the language of the Constitution itself, confirm the positions of African Americans, women, and Native Americans in the new republic? How did these roles compare to the stated goals of the republic? **18.** What were the circumstances that led to Shays’ Rebellion? What was the government’s response? Would this response have confirmed or negated the grievances of the participants in the uprising? Why? --- 192 7 • Critical Thinking Questions Access for free at openstax.org --- # Growing Pains: The New Republic, 1790–1820 8 ---- **FIGURE 8.1** “The happy Effects of the Grand Systom [sic] of shutting Ports against the English!!” appeared in 1808. Less than a year earlier, Thomas Jefferson had recommended (and Congress had passed) the Embargo Act of 1807, which barred American ships from leaving their ports. ---- ## CHAPTER OUTLINE **8.1** Competing Visions: Federalists and Democratic-Republicans **8.2** The New American Republic **8.3** Partisan Politics **8.4** The United States Goes Back to War ---- **INTRODUCTION** The partisan political cartoon above (Figure 8.1) lampoons Thomas Jefferson’s 1807 Embargo Act, a move that had a devastating effect on American commerce. American farmers and merchants complain to President Jefferson, while the French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte whispers to him, “You shall be King hereafter.” This image illustrates one of many political struggles in the years after the fight for ratification of the Constitution. In the nation’s first few years, no organized political parties existed. This began to change as U.S. citizens argued bitterly about the proper size and scope of the new national government. As a result, the 1790s witnessed the rise of opposing political parties: the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans. Federalists saw unchecked democracy as a dire threat to the republic, and they pointed to the excesses of the French Revolution as proof of what awaited. Democratic-Republicans opposed the Federalists’ notion that only the wellborn and well educated were able to oversee the republic; they saw it as a pathway to oppression by an aristocracy. --- # 8.1 Competing Visions: Federalists and Democratic-Republicans ## LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Describe the competing visions of the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans * Identify the protections granted to citizens under the Bill of Rights * Explain Alexander Hamilton’s financial programs as secretary of the treasury <table> <thead> <tr> <th>1791</th> <th>1794</th> <th>1798</th> <th>1803</th> <th>1807</th> <th>1812–1814</th> <th>1814</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td> Congress passes Bill of Rights </td> <td> Western Pennsylvanians protest in Whiskey Rebellion; Jay's Treaty ensures commerce between U.S. and Britain </td> <td> Congress passes Alien and Sedition Acts </td> <td> Thomas Jefferson brokers Louisiana Purchase </td> <td> Embargo attempts to end British practice of capturing American sailors </td> <td> United States at war with Great Britain </td> <td> Treaty of Ghent ends War of 1812 </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="7" align="center">FIGURE 8.2</td> </tr> </tbody> </table> In June 1788, New Hampshire became the ninth state to ratify the federal Constitution, and the new plan for a strong central government went into effect. Elections for the first U.S. Congress were held in 1788 and 1789, and members took their seats in March 1789. In a reflection of the trust placed in him as the personification of republican virtue, George Washington became the first president in April 1789. John Adams served as his vice president; the pairing of a representative from Virginia (Washington) with one from Massachusetts (Adams) symbolized national unity. Nonetheless, political divisions quickly became apparent. Washington and Adams represented the Federalist Party, which generated a backlash among those who resisted the new government’s assertions of federal power. ## FEDERALISTS IN POWER Though the Revolution had overthrown British rule in the United States, supporters of the 1787 federal constitution, known as Federalists, adhered to a decidedly British notion of social hierarchy. The Federalists did not, at first, compose a political party. Instead, Federalists held certain shared assumptions. For them, political participation continued to be linked to property rights, which barred many citizens from voting or holding office. Federalists did not believe the Revolution had changed the traditional social roles between women and men, or between White people and other races. They did believe in clear distinctions in rank and intelligence. To these supporters of the Constitution, the idea that all were equal appeared ludicrous. Women, Black, and Native peoples, they argued, had to know their place as secondary to White male citizens. Attempts to impose equality, they feared, would destroy the republic. The United States was not created to be a democracy. The architects of the Constitution committed themselves to leading the new republic, and they held a majority among the members of the new national government. Indeed, as expected, many assumed the new executive posts the first Congress created. Washington appointed Alexander Hamilton, a leading Federalist, as secretary of the treasury. For secretary of state, he chose Thomas Jefferson. For secretary of war, he appointed Henry Knox, who had served with him during the Revolutionary War. Edmond Randolph, a Virginia delegate to the --- Constitutional Convention, was named attorney general. In July 1789, Congress also passed the Judiciary Act, creating a Supreme Court of six justices headed by those who were committed to the new national government. Congress passed its first major piece of legislation by placing a duty on imports under the 1789 Tariff Act. Intended to raise revenue to address the country’s economic problems, the act was a victory for nationalists, who favored a robust, powerful federal government and had worked unsuccessfully for similar measures during the Confederation Congress in the 1780s. Congress also placed a fifty-cent-per-ton duty (based on materials transported, not the weight of a ship) on foreign ships coming into American ports, a move designed to give the commercial advantage to American ships and goods. ### THE BILL OF RIGHTS Many Americans opposed the 1787 Constitution because it seemed a dangerous concentration of centralized power that threatened the rights and liberties of ordinary U.S. citizens. These opponents, known collectively as Anti-Federalists, did not constitute a political party, but they united in demanding protection for individual rights, and several states made the passing of a bill of rights a condition of their acceptance of the Constitution. Rhode Island and North Carolina rejected the Constitution because it did not already have this specific bill of rights. Federalists followed through on their promise to add such a bill in 1789, when Virginia Representative James Madison introduced and Congress approved the **Bill of Rights** (Table 8.1). Adopted in 1791, the bill consisted of the first ten amendments to the Constitution and outlined many of the personal rights state constitutions already guaranteed. <table> <thead> <tr> <th>Amendment 1</th> <th>Right to freedoms of religion and speech; right to assemble and to petition the government for <br/> redress of grievances</th> </tr> </thead> <tr> <td>Amendment 2</td> <td>Right to keep and bear arms to maintain a well-regulated militia</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Amendment 3</td> <td>Right not to house soldiers during time of war</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Amendment 4</td> <td>Right to be secure from unreasonable search and seizure</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Amendment 5</td> <td>Rights in criminal cases, including to due process and indictment by grand jury for capital <br/> crimes, as well as the right not to testify against oneself</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Amendment 6</td> <td>Right to a speedy trial by an impartial jury</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Amendment 7</td> <td>Right to a jury trial in civil cases</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Amendment 8</td> <td>Right not to face excessive bail or fines, or cruel and unusual punishment</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Amendment 9</td> <td>Rights retained by the people, even if they are not specifically enumerated by the Constitution</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Amendment 10</td> <td>States’ rights to powers not specifically delegated to the federal government</td> </tr></table> <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="2"><b>TABLE 8.1</b> Rights Protected by the First Ten Amendments</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td colspan="2">[Content of the table is not provided in the image or OCR]</td> </tr> </tbody> </table> The adoption of the Bill of Rights softened the Anti-Federalists’ opposition to the Constitution and gave the new federal government greater legitimacy among those who otherwise distrusted the new centralized power created by men of property during the secret 1787 Philadelphia Constitutional Convention. ### 🟢 CLICK AND EXPLORE Visit the National Archives (https://openstax.org/l/BillRights) to consider the first ten amendments to the --- Constitution as an expression of the fears many citizens harbored about the powers of the new federal government. What were these fears? How did the Bill of Rights calm them? ### ALEXANDER HAMILTON’S PROGRAM Alexander Hamilton, Washington’s secretary of the treasury, was an ardent nationalist who believed a strong federal government could solve many of the new country’s financial ills. Born in the West Indies, Hamilton had worked on a