in Harper’s Weekly in 1873. Survivors of the Colfax Massacre tend to those involved in the conflict. The dead and wounded all appear to be Black, and two White men on horses watch over them. Another man stands with a gun pointed at the survivors.] **FIGURE 16.15** In this illustration by Charles Harvey Weigall, captioned “The Louisiana Murders—Gathering the Dead and Wounded” and published in *Harper’s Weekly* in 1873, survivors of the Colfax Massacre tend to those involved in the conflict. The dead and wounded all appear to be Black, and two White men on horses watch over them. Another man stands with a gun pointed at the survivors. In other areas of the South, the Democratic Party gained control over state politics. Texas came under Democratic control by 1873, and in the following year Alabama and Arkansas followed suit. In national politics, too, the Democrats gained ground—especially during the 1874 elections, when they recaptured control of the House of Representatives for the first time since before the Civil War. Every other southern state, with the exception of Florida, South Carolina, and Louisiana—the states where federal troops remained a force—also fell to the Democratic Party and the restoration of White supremacy. Southerners everywhere celebrated their “redemption” from Radical Republican rule. ### THE CONTESTED ELECTION OF 1876 By the time of the 1876 presidential election, Reconstruction had come to an end in most southern states. In Congress, the political power of the Radical Republicans had waned, although some continued their efforts to --- realize the dream of equality between Black and White people. One of the last attempts to do so was the passage of the 1875 Civil Rights Act, which required equality in public places and on juries. This law was challenged in court, and in 1883 the Supreme Court ruled it unconstitutional, arguing that the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments did not prohibit discrimination by private individuals. By the 1870s, the Supreme Court had also undercut the letter and the spirit of the Fourteenth Amendment by interpreting it as affording freed people only limited federal protection from the Klan and other terror groups. The country remained bitterly divided, and this was reflected in the contested election of 1876. While Grant wanted to run for a third term, scandals and Democratic successes in the South dashed those hopes. Republicans instead selected Rutherford B. Hayes, the three-time governor of Ohio. Democrats nominated Samuel Tilden, the reform governor of New York, who was instrumental in ending the Tweed Ring and Tammany Hall corruption in New York City. The November election produced an apparent Democratic victory, as Tilden carried the South and large northern states with a 300,000-vote advantage in the popular vote. However, disputed returns from Louisiana, South Carolina, Florida, and Oregon, whose electoral votes totaled twenty, threw the election into doubt. Hayes could still win if he gained those twenty electoral votes. As the Constitution did not provide a method to determine the validity of disputed votes, the decision fell to Congress, where Republicans controlled the Senate and Democrats controlled the House of Representatives. In late January 1877, Congress tried to break the deadlock by creating a special electoral commission composed of five senators, five representatives, and five justices of the Supreme Court. The congressional delegation represented both parties equally, with five Democrats and five Republicans. The court delegation had two Democrats, two Republicans, and one independent—David Davis, who resigned from the Supreme Court (and from the commission) when the Illinois legislature elected him to the Senate. After Davis’s resignation, President Grant selected a Republican to take his place, tipping the scales in favor of Hayes. The commission then awarded the disputed electoral votes and the presidency to Hayes, voting on party lines, 8 to 7 (Figure 16.16). The Democrats called foul, threatening to hold up the commission’s decision in the courts. <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">1876</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td>OR 3</td> <td>CA 6</td> <td>NV 3</td> <td>CO 3</td> <td>KS 5</td> <td>NE 3</td> <td>MN 5</td> <td>WI 10</td> <td>MI 11</td> <td>IL 21</td> <td>IN 15</td> <td>OH 21</td> <td>PA 26</td> <td>NY 35</td> <td>VT 5</td> <td>NH 5</td> <td>MA 13</td> <td>RI 4</td> <td>CT 6</td> <td>NJ 9</td> <td>DE 3</td> <td>MD 8</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="3" style="background-color:#f4cccc;">Republican (Hayes)</td> <td colspan="3" style="background-color:#cfe2f3;">Democratic (Tilden)</td> <td colspan="14" style="background-color:#f4cccc;">Republican (Hayes)</td> </tr> <tr> <td>TX 8</td> <td>LA 8</td> <td>AR 7</td> <td>MO 15</td> <td>IA 13</td> <td>NE 3</td> <td>KS 5</td> <td>TN 12</td> <td>MS 8</td> <td>AL 10</td> <td>GA 11</td> <td>FL 4</td> <td>SC 7</td> <td>NC 10</td> <td>VA 11</td> <td>WV 5</td> <td>KY 12</td> <td>OH 21</td> <td>IN 15</td> <td>IL 21</td> <td>MI 11</td> <td>WI 10</td> </tr> </tbody> </table> **FIGURE 16.16** This map illustrates the results of the presidential election of 1876. Tilden, the Democratic candidate, swept the South, with the exception of the contested states of Florida, Louisiana, and South Carolina. In what became known as the **Compromise of 1877**, Republican Senate leaders worked with the Democratic leadership so they would support Hayes and the commission’s decision. The two sides agreed that one Southern Democrat would be appointed to Hayes’s cabinet, Democrats would control federal patronage (the awarding of government jobs) in their areas in the South, and there would be a commitment to generous internal improvements, including federal aid for the Texas and Pacific Railway. Perhaps most important, all remaining federal troops would be withdrawn from the South, a move that effectively ended Reconstruction. Hayes believed that southern leaders would obey and enforce the Reconstruction-era constitutional amendments that protected the rights of freed people. His trust was soon proved to be misguided, much to his dismay, and he devoted a large part of his life to securing rights for freedmen. For their part, the Democrats took over the remaining southern states, creating what became known as the “Solid South”—a region that consistently voted in a bloc for the Democratic Party. --- # Key Terms **Black codes** laws some southern states designed to maintain White supremacy by keeping freed people impoverished and in debt **carpetbagger** a term used for northerners working in the South during Reconstruction; it implied that these were opportunists who came south for economic or political gain **Compromise of 1877** the agreement between Republicans and Democrats, after the contested election of 1876, in which Rutherford B. Hayes was awarded the presidency in exchange for withdrawing the last of the federal troops from the South **crop-lien system** a loan system in which store owners extended credit to farmers for the purchase of goods in exchange for a portion of their future crops **Freedmen’s Bureau** the Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands, which was created in 1865 to ease Black peoples’ transition from slavery to freedom **Ironclad Oath** an oath that the Wade-Davis Bill required a majority of voters and government officials in Confederate states to take; it involved swearing that they had never supported the Confederacy **Ku Klux Klan** a White vigilante organization that engaged in terroristic violence with the aim of stopping Reconstruction **Radical Republicans** northern Republicans who contested Lincoln’s treatment of Confederate states and proposed harsher punishments **Reconstruction** the twelve-year period after the Civil War in which the rebel Southern states were integrated back into the Union **redeemers** a term used for southern White people committed to rolling back the gains of Reconstruction **scalawags** a pejorative term used for southern White people who supported Reconstruction **sharecropping** a crop-lien system in which people paid rent on land they farmed (but did not own) with the crops they grew **ten percent plan** Lincoln’s Reconstruction plan, which required only 10 percent of the 1860 voters in Confederate states to take an oath of allegiance to the Union **Union Leagues** fraternal groups loyal to the Union and the Republican Party that became political and civic centers for Black people in former Confederate states # Summary ## 16.1 Restoring the Union President Lincoln worked to reach his goal of reunifying the nation quickly and proposed a lenient plan to reintegrate the Confederate states. After his murder in 1865, Lincoln’s vice president, Andrew Johnson, sought to reconstitute the Union quickly, pardoning Southerners en masse and providing Southern states with a clear path back to readmission. By 1866, Johnson announced the end of Reconstruction. Radical Republicans in Congress disagreed, however, and in the years ahead would put forth their own plan of Reconstruction. ## 16.2 Congress and the Remaking of the South, 1865–1866 The conflict between President Johnson and the Republican-controlled Congress over the proper steps to be taken with the defeated Confederacy grew in intensity in the years immediately following the Civil War. While the president concluded that all that needed to be done in the South had been done by early 1866, Congress forged ahead to stabilize the defeated Confederacy and extend to freed people citizenship and equality before the law. Congress prevailed over Johnson’s vetoes as the friction between the president and the Republicans increased. ## 16.3 Radical Reconstruction, 1867–1872 Though President Johnson declared Reconstruction complete less than a year after the Confederate surrender, members of Congress disagreed. Republicans in Congress began to implement their own plan of bringing law and order to the South through the use of military force and martial law. Radical Republicans who advocated --- for a more equal society pushed their program forward as well, leading to the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment, which finally gave Black men the right to vote. The new amendment empowered Black voters, who made good use of the vote to elect Black politicians. It disappointed female suffragists, however, who had labored for years to gain women’s right to vote. By the end of 1870, all the southern states under Union military control had satisfied the requirements of Congress and been readmitted to the Union. ## 16.4 The Collapse of Reconstruction The efforts launched by Radical Republicans in the late 1860s generated a massive backlash in the South in the 1870s as White people fought against what they considered “negro misrule.” Paramilitary terrorist cells emerged, committing countless atrocities in their effort to “redeem” the South from Black Republican rule. In many cases, these organizations operated as an extension of the Democratic Party. Scandals hobbled the Republican Party, as did a severe economic depression. By 1875, Reconstruction had largely come to an end. The contested presidential election the following year, which was decided in favor of the Republican candidate, and the removal of federal troops from the South only confirmed the obvious: Reconstruction had failed to achieve its primary objective of creating an interracial democracy that provided equal rights to all citizens. # Review Questions 1. What was Lincoln’s primary goal immediately following the Civil War? A. punishing the rebel states B. improving the lives of formerly enslaved people C. reunifying the country D. paying off the debts of the war 2. In 1864 and 1865, Radical Republicans were most concerned with ________. A. securing civil rights for formerly enslaved people B. barring ex-Confederates from political office C. seeking restitution from Confederate states D. preventing Andrew Johnson’s ascent to the presidency 3. What was the purpose of the Thirteenth Amendment? How was it different from the Emancipation Proclamation? 4. Which of the following was *not* one of the functions of the Freedmen’s Bureau? A. collecting taxes B. reuniting families C. establishing schools D. helping workers secure labor contracts 5. Which person or group was most responsible for the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment? A. President Johnson B. northern voters C. southern voters D. Radical Republicans in Congress 6. What was the goal of the Black codes? 7. Under Radical Reconstruction, which of the following did former Confederate states *not* need to do in order to rejoin the Union? A. pass the Fourteenth Amendment B. pass the Fifteenth Amendment C. revise their state constitution --- D. allow all freed men over the age of 21 to vote 8. The House of Representatives impeached Andrew Johnson over ________. A. the Civil Rights Act B. the Fourteenth Amendment C. the Military Reconstruction Act D. the Tenure of Office Act 9. What were the benefits and drawbacks of the Fifteenth Amendment? 10. Which of the following is *not* one of the methods the Ku Klux Klan and other terrorist groups used to intimidate Black people and White sympathizers? A. burning public schools B. petitioning Congress C. murdering freedmen who tried to vote D. threatening, beating, and killing those who disagreed with them 11. Which of the following was the term southerners used for a White southerner who tried to overturn the changes of Reconstruction? A. scalawag B. carpetbagger C. redeemer D. white knight 12. Why was it difficult for southern free Black people to gain economic independence after the Civil War? **Critical Thinking Questions** 13. How do you think would history have been different if Lincoln had not been assassinated? How might his leadership after the war have differed from that of Andrew Johnson? 14. Was the Thirteenth Amendment a success or a failure? Discuss the reasons for your answer. 15. Consider the differences between the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments. What does the Fourteenth Amendment do that the Thirteenth does not? 16. Consider social, political, and economic equality. In what ways did Radical Reconstruction address and secure these forms of equality? Where did it fall short? 17. Consider the problem of terrorism during Radical Reconstruction. If you had been an adviser to President Grant, how would you propose to deal with the problem? --- 442 16 • Critical Thinking Questions Access for free at openstax.org --- # Go West Young Man! Westward Expansion, 1840-1900 **FIGURE 17.1** A widely held belief in the nineteenth century contended that Americans had a divine right and responsibility to settle the West with Protestant democratic values. Newspaper editor Horace Greely, who coined the phrase “Go west, young man,” encouraged Americans to fulfill this dream. Artists of the day depicted this western expansion in idealized landscapes that bore little resemblance to the difficulties of life on the trail. ## CHAPTER OUTLINE **17.1** The Westward Spirit **17.2** Homesteading: Dreams and Realities **17.3** Making a Living in Gold and Cattle **17.4** The Assault on American Indian Life and Culture **17.5** The Impact of Expansion on Chinese Immigrants and Hispanic Citizens ## INTRODUCTION In the middle of the nineteenth century, farmers in the “Old West”—the land across the Allegheny Mountains in Pennsylvania—began to hear about the opportunities to be found in the “New West.” They had long believed that the land west of the Mississippi was a great desert, unfit for human habitation. But now, the federal government was encouraging them to join the migratory stream westward to this unknown land. For a variety of reasons, Americans increasingly felt compelled to fulfill their “Manifest Destiny,” a phrase that came to mean that they were expected to spread across the land given to them by God and, most importantly, spread predominantly American values to the frontier (Figure 17.1). With great trepidation, hundreds, and then hundreds of thousands, of settlers packed their lives into wagons and set out, following the Oregon, California, and Santa Fe Trails, to seek a new life in the West. They imagined open lands, economic opportunity, and greater freedom to fulfill the democratic vision originally promoted by Thomas Jefferson despite Native American communities living in the region. Whatever their motivation, the great migration was underway. The American pioneer spirit was born. --- # 17.1 The Westward Spirit ### LEARNING OBJECTIVES By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Explain the evolution of American views about westward migration in the mid-nineteenth century * Analyze the ways in which the federal government facilitated Americans’ westward migration in the mid-nineteenth century <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">Timeline of Key Events in Westward Expansion</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td>1848</td> <td>California Gold Rush begins</td> <td></td> <td>1862</td> <td>Homestead and Pacific Railway Acts encourage westward migration; Dakota War fought</td> <td></td> <td></td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td></td> <td>1869</td> <td>Transcontinental Railroad completed</td> <td></td> <td>1873</td> <td>Barbed wire invented</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td></td> <td>1876</td> <td>Battle of Little Bighorn fought</td> <td></td> <td>1882</td> <td>Chinese Exclusion Act passed</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td></td> <td></td> <td></td> <td></td> <td>1887</td> <td>Dawes Act divides tribal lands into homesteads and sells excess land to settlers</td> </tr> </tbody> </table> *Figure 17.2* (credit “barbed wire”: modification of work by the U.S. Department of Commerce) While a small number of settlers had pushed westward before the mid-nineteenth century, the land west of the Mississippi was largely unexplored by the United States. Most Americans, if they thought of it at all, viewed this territory as an arid wasteland suitable only for American Indians. The reflections of early explorers who conducted scientific treks throughout the West tended to confirm this belief. Major Stephen Harriman Long, who commanded an expedition through Missouri and into the Yellowstone region in 1819–1820, frequently described the Great Plains as an arid and useless region, suitable as nothing more than a “great American desert.” But, beginning in the 1840s, a combination of economic opportunity and ideological encouragement changed the way Americans thought of the West. The federal government offered a number of incentives, making it viable for Americans to take on the challenge of seizing these rough lands from their Native American and Hispanic owners. Still, most Americans who went west needed some financial security at the outset of their journey; even with government aid, the truly poor could not make the trip. The cost of moving an entire family westward, combined with the risks as well as the questionable chances of success, made the move prohibitive for most. While the economic Panic of 1837 led many to question the promise of urban America, and thus turn their focus to the promise of commercial farming in the West, the Panic also resulted in many lacking the financial resources to make such a commitment. For most, the dream to “Go west, young man” remained unfulfilled. While much of the basis for westward expansion was economic, there was also a more philosophical reason, which was bound up in the American belief that the country—and the Indigenous peoples who populated it—were destined to come under the civilizing rule of Euro-American settlers and their superior technology, most notably railroads and the telegraph. While the extent to which that belief was a heartfelt motivation held by most Americans, or simply a rationalization of the conquests that followed, remains debatable, the clashes—both physical and cultural—that followed this western migration left scars on the country that are still felt today. ## MANIFEST DESTINY The concept of **Manifest Destiny** found its roots in the long-standing traditions of territorial expansion upon which the nation itself was founded. This phrase, which implies divine encouragement for territorial expansion, was coined by magazine editor John O’Sullivan in 1845, when he wrote in the *United States Magazine and Democratic Review* that “it was our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our multiplying millions.” Although the context of O’Sullivan’s original --- article was to encourage expansion into the newly acquired Texas territory, the spirit it invoked would subsequently be used to encourage westward settlement throughout the rest of the nineteenth century. Land developers, railroad magnates, and other investors capitalized