“mourning wars” in eastern North America were designed to gain captives who would either be adopted (“requickened” as a replacement for a deceased loved one) or ritually tortured and executed to assuage the anger and grief caused by loss. ### The Cultivation of Plants European expansion in the Americas led to an unprecedented movement of plants across the Atlantic. A prime example is tobacco, which became a valuable export as the habit of smoking, previously unknown in Europe, took hold (Figure 3.16). Another example is sugar. Columbus brought sugarcane to the Caribbean on his second voyage in 1494, and thereafter a wide variety of other herbs, flowers, seeds, and roots made the transatlantic voyage. --- **FIGURE 3.16** Adriaen van Ostade, a Dutch artist, painted *An Apothecary Smoking in an Interior* in 1646. The large European market for American tobacco strongly influenced the development of some of the American colonies. Just as pharmaceutical companies today scour the natural world for new drugs, Europeans traveled to America to discover new medicines. The task of cataloging the new plants found there helped give birth to the science of botany. Early botanists included the English naturalist Sir Hans Sloane, who traveled to Jamaica in 1687 and there recorded hundreds of new plants (**Figure 3.17**). Sloane also helped popularize the drinking of chocolate, made from the cacao bean, in England. **FIGURE 3.17** English naturalist Sir Hans Sloane traveled to Jamaica and other Caribbean islands to catalog the flora of the new world. Native Americans, who possessed a vast understanding of local New World plants and their properties, would have been a rich source of information for those European botanists seeking to find and catalog potentially useful plants. Enslaved Africans, who had a tradition of the use of medicinal plants in their native land, adapted to their new surroundings by learning the use of New World plants through experimentation or from --- the native inhabitants. Native peoples and Africans employed their knowledge effectively within their own communities. One notable example was the use of the peacock flower to induce abortions: Native American and enslaved African women living in oppressive colonial regimes are said to have used this herb to prevent the birth of children into slavery. Europeans distrusted medical knowledge that came from African or native sources, however, and thus lost the benefit of this source of information. --- # Key Terms **headright system** a system in which parcels of land were granted to settlers who could pay their own way to Virginia **indenture** a labor contract that promised young men, and sometimes women, money and land after they worked for a set period of years **Jesuits** members of the Society of Jesus, an elite Catholic religious order founded in the 1540s to spread Catholicism and to combat the spread of Protestantism **maroon communities** groups of escaped enslaved people who resisted recapture and eked a living from the land **Middle Passage** the perilous, often deadly transatlantic crossing of ships carrying captured Africans from the African coast to the New World **musket** a light, long-barreled European gun **patroonships** large tracts of land and governing rights granted to merchants by the Dutch West India Company in order to encourage colonization **repartimiento** a Spanish colonial system requiring Native American towns to supply workers for the colonizers **Timucua** the native people of Florida, whom the Spanish displaced with the founding of St. Augustine, the first Spanish settlement in North America **wampum** shell beads used in ceremonies and as jewelry and currency # Summary ### 3.1 Spanish Exploration and Colonial Society In their outposts at St. Augustine and Santa Fe, the Spanish never found the fabled mountains of gold they sought. They did find many native people to convert to Catholicism, but their zeal nearly cost them the colony of Santa Fe, which they lost for twelve years after the Pueblo Revolt. In truth, the grand dreams of wealth, conversion, and a social order based on Spanish control never came to pass as Spain envisioned them. ### 3.2 Colonial Rivalries: Dutch and French Colonial Ambitions The French and Dutch established colonies in the northeastern part of North America: the Dutch in present-day New York, and the French in present-day Canada. Both colonies were primarily trading posts for furs. While they failed to attract many colonists from their respective home countries, these outposts nonetheless intensified imperial rivalries in North America. Both the Dutch and the French relied on native peoples to harvest the pelts that proved profitable in Europe. ### 3.3 English Settlements in America The English came late to colonization of the Americas, establishing stable settlements in the 1600s after several unsuccessful attempts in the 1500s. After Roanoke Colony failed in 1587, the English found more success with the founding of Jamestown in 1607 and Plymouth in 1620. The two colonies were very different in origin. The Virginia Company of London founded Jamestown with the express purpose of making money for its investors, while Puritans founded Plymouth to practice their own brand of Protestantism without interference. Both colonies battled difficult circumstances, including poor relationships with neighboring Native American tribes. Conflicts flared repeatedly in the Chesapeake Bay tobacco colonies and in New England, where a massive uprising against the English in 1675 to 1676—King Philip’s War—nearly succeeded in driving the intruders back to the sea. ### 3.4 The Impact of Colonization The development of the Atlantic slave trade forever changed the course of European settlement in the Americas. Other transatlantic travelers, including diseases, goods, plants, animals, and even ideas like the --- concept of private land ownership, further influenced life in America during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The exchange of pelts for European goods including copper kettles, knives, and guns played a significant role in changing the material cultures of native peoples. During the seventeenth century, native peoples grew increasingly dependent on European trade items. At the same time, many native inhabitants died of European diseases, while survivors adopted new ways of living with their new neighbors. # Review Questions 1. Which of the following was a goal of the Spanish in their destruction of Fort Caroline? A. establishing a foothold from which to battle the Timucua B. claiming a safe place to house the New World treasures that would be shipped back to Spain C. reducing the threat of French privateers D. locating a site for the establishment of Santa Fe 2. Why did the Spanish build Castillo de San Marcos? A. to protect the local Timucua B. to defend against imperial challengers C. as a seat for visiting Spanish royalty D. to house visiting delegates from rival imperial powers 3. How did the Pueblo attempt to maintain their autonomy in the face of Spanish settlement? 4. What was patroonship? A. a Dutch ship used for transporting beaver furs B. a Dutch system of patronage that encouraged the arts C. a Dutch system of granting tracts of land in New Netherland to encourage colonization D. a Dutch style of hat trimmed with beaver fur from New Netherland 5. Which religious order joined the French settlement in Canada and tried to convert the natives to Christianity? A. Franciscans B. Calvinists C. Anglicans D. Jesuits 6. How did the French and Dutch colonists differ in their religious expectations? How did both compare to Spanish colonists? 7. What was the most lucrative product of the Chesapeake colonies? A. corn B. tobacco C. gold and silver D. enslaved people 8. What was the primary cause of Bacon’s Rebellion? A. former indentured servants wanted more opportunities to expand their territory B. Enslaved Africans wanted better treatment C. Susquahannock Natives wanted the Jamestown settlers to pay a fair price for their land D. Jamestown politicians were jockeying for power 9. The founders of the Plymouth colony were: A. Puritans --- B. Catholics C. Anglicans D. Jesuits 10. Which of the following is *not* true of the Puritan religion? A. It required close reading of scripture. B. Church membership required a conversion narrative. C. Literacy was crucial. D. Only men could participate. 11. How did the Chesapeake colonists solve their labor problems? 12. What was the Middle Passage? A. the fabled sea route from Europe to the Far East B. the land route from Europe to Africa C. the transatlantic journey that enslaved Africans made to America D. the line between the northern and southern colonies 13. Which of the following is *not* an item Europeans introduced to Native Americans? A. wampum B. glass beads C. copper kettles D. metal tools 14. How did European muskets change life for native peoples in the Americas? 15. Compare and contrast European and Native American views on property. ### Critical Thinking Questions 16. Compare and contrast life in the Spanish, French, Dutch, and English colonies, differentiating between the Chesapeake Bay and New England colonies. Who were the colonizers? What were their purposes in being there? How did they interact with their environments and the native inhabitants of the lands on which they settled? 17. Describe the attempts of the various European colonists to convert native peoples to their belief systems. How did these attempts compare to one another? What were the results of each effort? 18. How did chattel slavery differ from indentured servitude? How did the former system come to replace the latter? What were the results of this shift? 19. What impact did Europeans have on their New World environments—native peoples and their communities as well as land, plants, and animals? Conversely, what impact did the New World’s native inhabitants, land, plants, and animals have on Europeans? How did the interaction of European and Native American societies, together, shape a world that was truly “new”? --- # Rule Britannia! The English Empire, 1660–1763 **4** ---- **FIGURE 4.1** Isaac Royall and his family, seen here in a 1741 portrait by Robert Feke (modified), moved to Medford, Massachusetts, from the West Indian island of Antigua, bringing enslaved people with them. They were an affluent British colonial family, proud of their success and the success of the British Empire. ---- ## CHAPTER OUTLINE **4.1** Charles II and the Restoration Colonies **4.2** The Glorious Revolution and the English Empire **4.3** An Empire of Slavery and the Consumer Revolution **4.4** Great Awakening and Enlightenment **4.5** Wars for Empire ---- ### INTRODUCTION The eighteenth century witnessed the birth of Great Britain (after the union of England and Scotland in 1707) and the expansion of the British Empire. By the mid-1700s, Great Britain had developed into a commercial and military powerhouse; its economic sway ranged from India, where the British East India Company had gained control over both trade and territory, to the West African coast, where British slave traders predominated, and to the British West Indies, whose lucrative sugar plantations, especially in Barbados and Jamaica, provided windfall profits for British planters. Meanwhile, the population rose dramatically in Britain’s North American colonies. In the early 1700s the population in the colonies had reached 250,000. By 1750, however, over a million British migrants and enslaved Africans had established a near-continuous zone of settlement on the Atlantic coast from Maine to Georgia. During this period, the ties between Great Britain and the American colonies only grew stronger. Anglo-American colonists considered themselves part of the British Empire in all ways: politically, militarily, religiously (as Protestants), intellectually, and racially. The portrait of the Royall family (Figure 4.1) exemplifies --- the colonial American gentry of the eighteenth century. Successful and well-to-do, they display fashions, hairstyles, and furnishings that all speak to their identity as proud and loyal British subjects. # 4.1 Charles II and the Restoration Colonies **LEARNING OBJECTIVES** By the end of this section, you will be able to: * Analyze the causes and consequences of the Restoration * Identify the Restoration colonies and their role in the expansion of the Empire <table> <thead> <tr> <th>1660</th> <th>1681</th> <th>1688–1689</th> <th>1689</th> <th>1733</th> <th>1739</th> <th>1741</th> <th>1754</th> <th>1763</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td>Charles II ascends English throne; Restoration begins</td> <td>William Penn <br>founds Pennsylvania Colony</td> <td>Glorious Revolution overthrows King James II</td> <td>Bill of Rights establishes constitutional monarchy in England</td> <td>James Oglethorpe founds Georgia for “worthy poor”</td> <td>Slaves revolt in Stono Rebellion</td> <td>Suspicious fires lead to New York Conspiracy Trials</td> <td>French and Indian War (Seven Years’ War) begins</td> <td>Treaty of Paris eliminates New France</td> </tr> </tbody> </table> **FIGURE 4.2** When Charles II ascended the throne in 1660, English subjects on both sides of the Atlantic celebrated the restoration of the English monarchy after a decade of living without a king as a result of the English Civil Wars. Charles II lost little time in strengthening England’s global power. From the 1660s to the 1680s, Charles II added more possessions to England’s North American holdings by establishing the Restoration colonies of New York and New Jersey (taking these areas from the Dutch) as well as Pennsylvania and the Carolinas. In order to reap the greatest economic benefit from England’s overseas possessions, Charles II enacted the mercantilist Navigation Acts, although many colonial merchants ignored them because enforcement remained lax. ## CHARLES II The chronicle of Charles II begins with his father, Charles I. Charles I ascended the English throne in 1625 and soon married a French Catholic princess, Henrietta Maria, who was not well liked by English Protestants because she openly practiced Catholicism during her husband’s reign. The most outspoken Protestants, the Puritans, had a strong voice in Parliament in the 1620s, and they strongly opposed the king’s marriage and his ties to Catholicism. When Parliament tried to contest his edicts, including the king’s efforts to impose taxes without Parliament’s consent, Charles I suspended Parliament in 1629 and ruled without one for the next eleven years. The ensuing struggle between the king and Parliament led to the outbreak of war. The English Civil War lasted from 1642 to 1649 and pitted the king and his Royalist supporters against Oliver Cromwell and his Parliamentary forces. After years of fighting, the Parliamentary forces gained the upper hand, and in 1649, they charged Charles I with treason and beheaded him. The monarchy was dissolved, and England became a --- republic: a state without a king. Oliver Cromwell headed the new English Commonwealth, and the period known as the **English interregnum**, or the time between kings, began. Though Cromwell enjoyed widespread popularity at first, over time he appeared to many in England to be taking on the powers of a military dictator. Dissatisfaction with Cromwell grew. When he died in 1658 and control passed to his son Richard, who lacked the political skills of his father, a majority of the English people feared an alternate hereditary monarchy in the making. They had had enough and asked Charles II to be king. In 1660, they welcomed the son of the executed king Charles I back to the throne to resume the English monarchy and bring the interregnum to an end (Figure 4.3) . The return of Charles II is known as the Restoration. ---- **FIGURE 4.3** The monarchy and Parliament fought for control of England during the seventeenth century. Though Oliver Cromwell (a), shown here in a 1656 portrait by Samuel Cooper, appeared to offer England a better mode of government, he assumed broad powers for himself and disregarded cherished English liberties established under Magna Carta in 1215. As a result, the English people welcomed Charles II (b) back to the throne in 1660. This portrait by John Michael Wright was painted ca. 1660–1665, soon after the new king gained the throne. ---- Charles II was committed to expanding England’s overseas possessions. His policies in the 1660s through the 1680s established and supported the **Restoration colonies**: the Carolinas, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania. All the Restoration colonies started as **proprietary colonies**, that is, the king gave each colony to a trusted individual, family, or group. ### THE CAROLINAS Charles II hoped to establish English control of the area between Virginia and Spanish Florida. To that end, he issued a royal charter in 1663 to eight trusted and loyal supporters, each of whom was to be a feudal-style proprietor of a region of the province of Carolina. These proprietors did not relocate to the colonies, however. Instead, English plantation owners from the tiny Caribbean island of Barbados, already a well-established English sugar colony fueled by slave labor, migrated to the southern part of Carolina to settle there. In 1670, they established Charles Town (later Charleston), named in honor of Charles II, at the junction of the Ashley and Cooper Rivers (Figure 4.4). As the settlement around Charles Town grew, it began to produce livestock for export to the West Indies. In the northern part of Carolina, settlers used sap from pine trees to create tar and pitch used to waterproof wooden ships. Political disagreements between settlers in the northern and southern parts of Carolina escalated in the 1710s through the 1720s and led to the creation, in 1729, of two colonies, North and South Carolina. The southern part of Carolina had been producing rice and indigo (a plant that yields a dark blue dye used by English royalty) since the 1700s, and South Carolina continued to depend on these main crops. North Carolina continued to produce --- items for ships, especially turpentine and tar, and its population increased as Virginians moved there to expand their tobacco holdings. Tobacco was the primary export of both Virginia and North Carolina, which also traded in deerskins and captured people from Africa. [The image shows a 1733 map of North America depicting the port of colonial Charles Towne.] **FIGURE 4.4** The port of colonial Charles Towne, depicted here on a 1733 map of North America, was the largest in the South and played a significant role in the Atlantic slave trade. Slavery developed quickly in the Carolinas, largely because so many of the early migrants came from Barbados, where slavery was well established. By the end of the 1600s, a very wealthy class of rice planters, who relied on enslaved people for labor, had attained dominance in the southern part of the Carolinas, especially around Charles Town. By 1715, South Carolina had a Black majority because of the number of enslaved people in the colony. The legal basis for slavery was established in the early 1700s as the Carolinas began to pass slave laws based on the Barbados slave codes of the late 1600s. These laws reduced Africans to the status of property to be bought and sold as other commodities. ### CLICK AND EXPLORE Visit the Charleston Museum’s description of its collection in the Lowcountry History Hall to learn more about the history of Charleston. As in other areas of English settlement, native peoples in the Carolinas suffered tremendously from the introduction of European diseases. Despite the effects of disease, Native Americans in the area endured and, following the pattern elsewhere in the colonies, grew dependent on European goods. Local Yamasee and Creek tribes built up a trade deficit with the English, trading deerskins and captive people for European guns. English settlers exacerbated tensions with local Native American tribes, especially the Yamasee, by expanding their rice and tobacco fields into Native American lands. Worse still, English traders took Native women captive as payment for debts. The outrages committed by traders, combined with the seemingly unstoppable expansion of English settlement onto native land, led to the outbreak of the Yamasee War (1715–1718), an effort by a coalition of local tribes to drive away the European invaders. This native effort to force the newcomers back across the Atlantic nearly succeeded in annihilating the Carolina colonies. Only when the Cherokee allied themselves with the English did the coalition’s goal of eliminating the English from the region falter. The Yamasee War demonstrates the key role native peoples played in shaping the outcome of colonial struggles and, perhaps most important, the disunity that existed between different native groups. ### NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY Charles II also set his sights on the Dutch colony of New Netherland. The English takeover of New Netherland --- originated in the imperial rivalry between the Dutch and the English. During the Anglo-Dutch wars of the 1650s and 1660s, the two powers attempted to gain commercial advantages in the Atlantic World. During the Second Anglo-Dutch War (1664–1667), English forces gained control of the Dutch fur trading colony of New Netherland, and in 1664, Charles II gave this colony (including present-day New Jersey) to his brother James, Duke of York (later James II). The colony and city were renamed New York in his honor. The Dutch in New York chafed under English rule. In 1673, during the Third Anglo-Dutch War