frequent elections, trial by jury, and freedom of the press. Without disturbing the Anglican Church establishment, Article 16 promised “the free exercise of religion” but admonished Virginians “to practice Christian forbearance, love, and charity towards each other.” Little changed at the local level, where county courts composed of permanently appointed magistrates continued to rule. Virginians continued to agonize over the legal place of religion for another decade. Conservative planters thought the established Anglican Church, called the Protestant Episcopal Church after 1784, was essential to public order and morality. Ever since the Great Awakening, they had struggled to suppress dissenting sects and prevent them from diminishing the church’s authority and their own. Baptists and other dissenters continued to protest, however, joined by Enlightenment figures like Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, who argued that religion was a strictly private matter that deserved no public funding. Following the war, some Virginians advocated a compromise that would distribute religious taxes according to the taxpayer’s instructions, but support for complete disestablishment grew steadily. In 1786, the General Assembly agreed, and adopted Thomas Jefferson’s Act for Establishing Religious Freedom. It began by declaring that “Almighty God hath created the mind free,” then branded religious taxes as “sinful and tyrannical,” and went on to affirm “that our civil rights have no dependence on our religious opinions any more than our opinions in physics or geometry.” The act banned religious taxes, any establishment of religion, and any religious test for holding office, and became the model for future guarantees of religious freedom in the states and the federal government. Reflecting the “revolution from below,” many active citizens de- --- mandated state constitutions that expanded equality as well as liberty and that spread political power to a broader circle of citizens. In North Carolina, for example, backcountry residents wanted "a simple Democracy or as near it as possible," and warned their representatives to "oppose everything that leans to aristocracy or power in the hands of the rich and chief men exercised to the oppression of the poor." A New Hampshire pamphlet echoed the same sentiments: "The people best know their own wants and necessities and are therefore best able to rule themselves." Voters elsewhere were equally firm, but many in the "better sort" worried about unchecked popular power. In many respects, state and federal politics would reflect this fundamental tension for the next generation. Pennsylvania did the most to meet the radicals' demands. In the spring of 1776, the Philadelphia militia had pressed successfully for a constitutional convention based on the votes of all male taxpayers who favored independence, not just the propertied elite. The gathered delegates included farmers, artisans, and shopkeepers from Pennsylvania's major white ethnic groups, with only a sprinkling of lawyers and businessmen. Their constitution gave almost all power to a single-chambered legislature that allowed no upper house for the wealthy, and provided for an executive committee instead of a governor armed with a veto. Annual elections and term limits clipped the power of legislators. The constitution guaranteed the vote to all male taxpayers and required that all laws and legislative debates be published and distributed for public consideration. The finished document horrified conservatives, who thought it meant mob rule, chaos, and the end of liberty. One called it "singular in its kind, confused, inconsistent, deficient in sense and grammar, and the ridicule of all America." Conflict over the Pennsylvania constitution continued until 1790, when the state abandoned it in favor of a more conventional framework featuring a bicameral assembly and a single governor. Massachusetts had the most procedural difficulty in framing its new government, but made the greatest progress in constitutional theory. In most states, provincial congresses had written the new constitutions and implemented them without popular ratification. Massachusetts's voters spotted the error in this procedure, however. If a legislature could write its own constitution, no legislative action could ever be unconstitutional, and a parliamentary-style tyranny would return. Bay State towns called instead for a special convention to write a constitution, with members elected for that purpose alone. This process made --- a clear distinction between a constitution and a statute, and between sovereignty and normal legislative authority. In America, the people would be sovereign, not the king, the parliament, or the legislature, so only the people could write and approve a constitution. Once this constitution had established a legislature, the lawmakers could pass statutes or ordinary laws, but they could not amend the constitution or violate it. By making the state constitution a direct expression of the people’s will, outside of and superior to ordinary law, Massachusetts established what became standard procedure for ensuring that lawmakers themselves were bound by the law. The process also allowed courts to void specific statutes as unconstitutional, regardless of their momentary popularity. ### THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION America’s leaders moved more slowly to create a national government, though everyone agreed that the “United Colonies” were a collective unit and not just a gaggle of separate republics. Congressmen realized that the United States would also need a written constitution and began to compose one in 1776, without following the elaborate procedures later devised by Massachusetts. The delegates immediately encountered a set of problems that would take more than a decade to resolve. Congress had originally given each state delegation one vote. Should that practice continue, giving tiny states the power to block action by those states that contained the majority of Americans, or should larger states have power commensurate with their populations? If power should depend on population, should slaves be counted, even though they possessed no political rights? The question of western land proved equally vexatious. Several states claimed vast tracts of land beyond the mountains, with the official boundaries of Massachusetts, Connecticut, Georgia, and the Carolinas stretching to the Mississippi. Virginia claimed virtually all the land north of North Carolina and west of the mountains. States like Maryland and New Jersey had no such clauses in their colonial charters, and naturally worried that the larger states would eventually overwhelm them. Several smaller states also hoped that their own land speculators would stand a better chance if western lands were controlled by the central government. The larger states not only protected their own speculators against others, but they also wished to use their western lands to compensate their veterans and pay their public debts. --- The quarrel over western lands was not only a debate over the equality of the states within the Union, but also a scramble among rival sets of creditors, land barons, and settler-soldiers. In between more urgent matters, the Continental Congress struggled with these questions for more than a year, and finally produced the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union in November 1777. This document basically formalized the existing arrangement: each state could send between three and seven delegates to the Confederation Congress but only received one vote. A simple majority of seven states could make ordinary decisions, more important matters required nine states, and amendments to the Articles required approval from all thirteen state legislatures. The Confederation Congress had the power to conduct war and negotiate peace. It could borrow money and print currency, but it had no power to impose taxes or coerce any state or its citizens. There was no executive or judicial branch; congressmen expected state courts to enforce the laws and congressional committees to administer the government. Recalling the colonies’ proposed alternative to the Stamp Act, the Articles allowed Congress to raise money by asking states for voluntary contributions, or requisitions, based on their land values. Fearing domination by the others, many state legislatures were reluctant to approve the Articles of Confederation. Maryland held out the longest, insisting that its giant neighbor Virginia first surrender its vast western lands to Congress. In 1780, Virginia finally promised to do so, Maryland ratified, and the first United States constitution began to operate. ## FINANCES AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS The new government faced a serious economic crisis. The war had been very expensive, and Americans had borrowed to pay for much of it. Congress and the states owed back pay and pensions to their soldiers, and wartime loans were coming due to Dutch and French financiers. At the same time, the war had inflicted massive property damage, and Americans longed to restore their farms and businesses with foreign goods. British merchants obliged them with generous credit terms, and the result was a major postwar shopping spree, paid for by a dramatic increase in private debt. Public and private debts to foreign lenders caught the United States in a web of economic and diplomatic entanglements. Americans needed to sell their products abroad to repay these public and private --- loans, but normal trade with Britain and its remaining colonies had ended with independence. Without treaties to open trade with other countries, Americans could not find alternate markets, and their commerce faced a serious crisis. The British were in no mood to negotiate, moreover, so long as the states refused to restore the property of Loyalists or require the repayment of prewar debts. Citing these grievances, Britain refused to fulfill its own treaty obligations to evacuate its Ohio Valley forts, with their dangerous potential for encouraging Indian warfare. Staggering under its debts, the United States fell into a major economic depression between 1784 and 1789. Some historians estimate that the effects of war and depression cut the United States’ gross domestic product by almost half between 1775 and 1790. Even if that figure is exaggerated, it is clear that the war had made Americans much poorer, and they paid very dearly for their independence and their principles. The Confederation Congress struggled against its economic problems with little success. As early as 1781, superintendent of finance and Philadelphia financier Robert Morris had proposed an amendment to the Articles of Confederation that would authorize a 5 percent impost, or import tariff. Morris wanted the money to “fund” the national debt, or, in other words, to guarantee its interest payments with specifically dedicated taxes. When wealthy men could see that lending money to the United States brought a secure return, he reasoned, loans would be easy to obtain and certificates of government indebtedness would become so valuable that they would back up a national currency. Tiny Rhode Island vetoed this idea, fearing that federal taxes would ruin its foreign trade. Congress sought another impost in 1783, but New York refused this time, fearing the creation of a powerful central government. In the absence of a national impost or a common set of trade policies, moreover, each state began to impose its own regulations and taxes on trade, to the despair of those who thought uniform economic policies were essential to national unity. Surveying the confusion, Robert Morris resigned in disgust to become a private banker, but his bank failed, his fortune collapsed, and he ended his life in debtor’s prison. ### LAND POLICIES The Confederation Congress had greater success with its land policies. Americans expected white settlement to spill over the mountains and --- fill their western territory with farms and towns. They assumed Native Americans would abandon the Middle Ground or vanish altogether, as so many tribes had already done in the East. Private speculators had been making purchases from Indian leaders since before the French and Indian War, and still continued to do so. Thousands of pioneer Americans had already moved into the area, many simply squatting, or settling on land without any legal title. Congress faced two major questions over western lands and territories, in addition to the challenge of Indians. First, should the federal government keep tight control of the territories, administering them like colonies of the eastern states, or should it allow their settlers to govern themselves? Second, should the government sell territorial land for high prices to finance the national debt or other major projects, or should it keep prices low to benefit the pioneers? As chairman of a congressional committee on western lands in 1784, Thomas Jefferson wanted cheap land for self-governing settlers. More cautious congressmen worried that the frontier would need supervision to prevent anarchy and that the nation’s most valuable asset must not be given away. Actual policies combined these two perspectives, but the tension between them continued to influence federal land policy throughout the nineteenth century. The Land Ordinance of 1785 enacted Jefferson’s recommendation of a rectangular survey for the West, dividing its forests and prairies into townships six miles square, each one containing 36 sections of one square mile, or 640 acres. This surveying system was extended into future land acquisitions, and it remained in force for the remainder of the period of federal land sales, creating the checkerboard landscape that dominates the West to this day. The act reserved the sixteenth section of each township to support schools, following Jefferson’s conviction that republics require an educated populace. Disappointing Jefferson, however, Congress tried to fill its empty treasury by auctioning public land to private buyers, with a minimum price of one dollar per acre and a minimum purchase of 640 acres, far more than ordinary squatters could afford. When sales proved disappointing, Congress decided to sell a single tract of 1.5 million acres to a private group named the Ohio Company for one million dollars in devalued paper money. (Land claims by a different company of the same name had sparked the first skirmishes of the Seven Years’ War.) The aggressive role of land speculators remained a controversial aspect of federal land policy for decades to come. --- In the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, Congress created a government for the Northwest Territory, defined as the land between the Ohio River, the Mississippi River, and the Great Lakes, or the modern states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan, plus much of Wisconsin and Minnesota. As its population grew, the territory could be subdivided into three to five smaller territories that would become new states fully equal to the old ones, not colonies ruled from a distance. Each would remain under congressional control until its population reached 5,000 adult men, who could then elect a territorial legislature. With a population of 60,000, the territory could summon its own convention to prepare a state constitution and apply for admission to the Union. Reflecting Jefferson’s thinking, the Northwest Ordinance prohibited slavery in the new territories, but did not emancipate the slaves of the settlers who were already there, and the true status of slavery in the Northwest Territory remained controversial for decades. No single ordinance covered all the region below the Ohio River, but slavery remained secure there. Kentucky split off from Virginia and joined the Union in 1792. Surrendered to Congress in 1789, North Carolina’s western lands first became the Territory South of the Ohio River and soon the state of Tennessee. Western Georgia comprised most of the future states of Alabama and Mississippi. Congress mostly followed the precedent of the Northwest Ordinance in framing these governments, but implicitly divided the federal domain into free and slave territories at the Ohio. Despite its inefficiency in other areas, the Confederation Congress’s land policy and its system for admitting new states endured. The Northwest Ordinance opened the way for mass migration to the Ohio country. Army observers counted 177 boats with 2,689 passengers floating past the modern town of Marietta, Ohio, over an eight-month period in 1786–1787, later followed by 146 boats with 3,196 passengers and 308 boats with 6,320 passengers in 1788. In order to prosper, these migrants would need to trade with the outside world, and the Mississippi River was their natural highway to the sea. The United States claimed the Mississippi as its western boundary, but Spain controlled its lower portion, including the port of New Orleans. Through British agreements with Spain, colonial Americans had used New Orleans and the Mississippi freely, but lost those rights with independence. Seeking to curb the strength of a new rival, Spain now refused to open the river to Americans. --- In 1785, Spain sent Don Diego de Gardoqui to negotiate with John Jay, American secretary for foreign affairs. Gardoqui refused to yield on the Mississippi question, but did offer other concessions. Sensing defeat, Jay asked if Congress would be willing to give up Mississippi commerce for 25 years in exchange for trade with Spain itself. Angry southerners immediately charged that Jay, a New Yorker, would sacrifice their interests in the West to benefit the East, and the proposed Jay-Gardoqui Treaty died in a storm of sectional outrage. The negotiations that should have added economic substance to congressional land policy only marked another failure of American diplomacy and another sign of the government’s weakness. ## Conflict in the States As the national government struggled under the Articles of Confederation, the center of American public life shifted to the states. The Revolution had opened up state governments, and given opportunity to men who might never have won power in colonial days. These new leaders did not always sympathize with the problems of Congress, and viewed the common good from the perspective of their own local constituents. Citizens who longed for a more “continental” approach to American problems worried that the state governments were making matters worse. ### Deference and Ambition In some respects, the new state constitutions responded to popular demands that originated in the “revolution from below” that accompanied the War for Independence. They were far more open and permissive than the colonial governments had been, but fell short of later standards of democracy and equality. Most retained some property requirements for voting and holding office, most denied political rights to free blacks, and all subordinated women to men. They allowed dissenters to worship freely but often retained state-funded churches or religious tests for office holding. Property restrictions on political rights soon diminished or disappeared, however, or only applied to certain offices. If only one-half or two-thirds of free white men could vote in colonial days, at least three-quarters could do so after independence. The new state governments were also less powerful than their colonial counterparts and more dependent on the popular will. Annual --- elections kept legislators closely attuned to the wishes of their constituents. Assemblies were much larger than before, with more representatives from western districts. Framers had hoped that members of the smaller upper houses would surpass those of the lower houses in age, wealth, and education, but little distinguished them in practice. Governors lacked the broad military and appointment powers of colonial chief executives, and if they had veto power, legislatures could override them. While the new state governments were not as democratic as they later became, they represented the free population more directly than their predecessors. While opening the doors to wider participation in government, gentlemen revolutionaries still expected that grateful citizens would continue their deference to the "better sort." They agreed with Alexander Hamilton, for example, that urban workers would never turn the commercial elite out of office, for "they know that the merchant is their natural patron and friend." Unfortunately for Hamilton and his friends, Revolutionary politics turned out differently. Real plowmen and artisans won public office only rarely, but middling farmers, petty traders, successful mechanics, and ambitious country lawyers won elections in all the states. Many were like William Thompson, the captain and tavern keeper of Charleston, who served as a military officer and aspired to civilian leadership as well. Others had made sudden fortunes as military suppliers, purchasers of confiscated property, currency speculators, and the like, but they kept the outlooks of their original communities and occupations. They were also less educated, less well traveled, and less likely to have served in the Confederation Congress or the Continental Army (as distinct from their state militias), or to share other experiences that would change their perspectives beyond the common sense of their immediate neighbors. Modern historians have therefore called them localists in contrast to their more cosmopolitan opponents. The localist representatives were much closer to ordinary white Americans than their predecessors and brought far more popular participation to American government than the original revolutionaries had ever wanted. They typically quoted the egalitarian rhetoric first voiced by the elite, and used it to demand more power than their superiors wanted to surrender. "The people," wailed Fisher Ames, a conservative leader from Massachusetts, "have turned against their teachers the doctrines which were inculcated in order to effect the late revolution." Conscientious republicans did not object when ordinary men got --- ahead in life, but they also wanted the newly rich or prominent to acquire the education, taste, and manners of established gentlemen before they claimed the right to lead society. "To rise from the cellar to the senate house, would be an unnatural hoist," complained the Princeton-educated novelist Hugh Henry Brackenridge, after he lost an election to William Findley, a former weaver. "It would be a reversion of the order of things," he protested, but it seemed to be happening anyway. Instead of accepting mere equality, a Connecticut writer complained, ambitious Americans jostled for a little something extra to set them above their neighbors. "Every man wants to be a judge, a justice, a sheriff, a deputy, or something else which will bring him a little money," he fumed, "or what is better, a little authority." The gentry often charged that ambitious office seekers lacked virtue because they put their local or personal needs ahead of the elite’s ideas of the common good. Localists replied that the wealthy would easily confuse their private interests with public benefits, and that majorities were more likely to recognize virtue than the privileged few. ## ECONOMIC CONTROVERSIES Localists and cosmopolitans clashed repeatedly over economic policy, beginning with the question of Loyalist property. Most states had punished Tories by confiscating their estates, but in the Treaty of Paris, Congress agreed to recommend an end to such policies. Many states refused, however, citing wartime outrages and the interests of struggling revolutionaries, so Britain retaliated by refusing to complete its own treaty obligations, including the evacuation of forts in the Ohio country. Popular majorities often approved harsh measures against Tories, shocking more conservative gentlemen who saw confiscation as wanton theft. Some fretted that if angry majorities could plunder the Tories, their own wealth might disappear next. More realistically, men like the Rutledge brothers of South Carolina hoped that improved relations with British merchants would restore Atlantic trade, and resented interference by those they saw as vengeful riffraff. The question of debt and paper money was another source of controversy, and here the questions of virtue and class interest arose most powerfully. Some states responded to the economic crisis with stay laws, or statutes that restricted the rights of creditors to collect their debts. Hoping to make debts easier to pay, states also issued their own paper money, sometimes lending it to farmers on the security of their lands, or using it to pay state debts and accepting it for pay- --- ment of taxes. Merchants accepted this money when it kept its value