invaders. Toussaint dominated the island by 1798, and as long as slavery remained illegal, he kept it as a nominal colony of France. Toussaint’s caution, however, did not disguise the fact that the ideals of the French and American republics had inspired what slaveholders feared most: a successful black revolution. Disliking both slavery and France, the Adams administration welcomed the revolution in Saint Domingue. In 1798, Secretary of State Timothy Pickering endorsed independence under Toussaint’s leadership, and trade with Haiti soon resumed. The Federalist government even sent military assistance, but the tables turned abruptly when Jefferson took office. Fearing that slave revolt might spread to the mainland, the new president cut off support, downgraded diplomatic contacts, and eventually banned US trade. Throughout the slave states, terrified whites shuddered at tales of “the horrors of St. Domingue,” and worried that the slave attendants of planter refugees might carry revolt to local blacks. Whites immediately suspected Haitian and radical French influence in 1800, for example, when a literate slave blacksmith named Gabriel organized an unsuccessful revolt in Richmond, Virginia. As Toussaint Louverture rose in Saint Domingue and the election of 1800 approached in the United States, General Napoleon Bonaparte seized dictatorial power from a corrupt and ineffective French gov- --- ernment. A brilliant strategist, Bonaparte won repeated victories on land, but the British navy controlled the seas, and war continued between France, Britain, and the other European powers. Seeking to rebuild France’s empire, Bonaparte sent a 40,000-man army to recapture Saint Domingue, reinstate slavery, and resume sugar production. He also reclaimed Louisiana from Spain to feed the restored colony. French forces captured Toussaint and he died in captivity, but yellow fever destroyed their army and Bonaparte gave up his plans. Without Saint Domingue, moreover, he had no more use for Louisiana. In 1803, Bonaparte surprised the United States with an offer to sell the entire territory for $15 million, approximately $0.13 an acre. Soon afterward, Toussaint’s leading subordinate Jean Jacques Dessalines proclaimed the independent republic of Haiti. Though Federalists had defended the Haitian Revolution, many criticized the Louisiana Purchase. Party members noted that the Constitution did not explicitly authorize the acquisition of new territory and denounced Jefferson for violating his own principles of strict construction. Congressman Manasseh Cutler of Massachusetts called it a “flagrant violation of the principles of the Constitution.” New England Federalists also feared the creation of new slave states and dilution of their region’s influence. More fundamentally, Federalists worried that western expansion would undermine the refinement and stability they thought a republic needed, and tilt the new nation toward barbarism. “We rush like a comet into infinite space,” warned Massachusetts’s Fisher Ames. “In our wild career, we may jostle some other world out of its orbit, but we shall in every event, quench the light of our own.” Jefferson replied that the Constitution gave unlimited power to make treaties and snapped up Napoleon’s proffered bargain. He called Louisiana “an empire for liberty,” and thought it would protect the republic by providing enough land for future generations of yeoman farmers to continue their way of life. As Federalists feared, he also surely realized its potential for expanding slavery. To explore the new territory, Jefferson sent an expedition under his personal secretary, Captain Meriwether Lewis, and Lieutenant William Clark up the Missouri River in 1804. He ordered Lewis and Clark to collect as much scientific information as possible about the animals, plants, geology, and Indians of Louisiana, and to find a route from the Missouri to the Pacific. Aided by Sacagawea, a Shoshone Indian woman who had learned multiple Indian languages while living with the Mandan tribe, Lewis and Clark returned after two and --- a half years of perilous travel. Passing over the Rocky Mountains, their Corps of Discovery descended the Columbia River and spent the winter of 1805–1806 on the Pacific coast of Oregon, before regaining St. Louis the following fall. The voyage of Lewis and Clark laid a basis for American expansion to the Pacific Ocean that would not be formalized until 1846. # The Trans-Appalachian West After independence, settlers began flooding the lands between the Appalachians and the Mississippi. Native Americans resisted unsuccessfully, and the government scrambled to accommodate the newcomers. Pioneers struggled for livelihoods and some became unruly without eastern constraints. In the years after 1800, however, a new wave of religious revivals reinforced order in frontier communities, and spread eastward to enlist a new generation of converts throughout the nation. ### WHITES AND INDIANS BEYOND THE MOUNTAINS Euro-Americans had taken almost two centuries to move from the Atlantic to the Appalachians, but raced from there to the Mississippi in less than a generation. As early as the 1770s, hunters and trappers like Daniel Boone had entered eastern Tennessee from North Carolina and Virginia. Independence erased the Proclamation Line of 1763, allowing thousands to follow Boone’s trail to the fabled hunting grounds that Native Americans called Caintuck. In the late 1780s, parties of Revolutionary veterans floated down the Ohio to claim lands and establish camps at Marietta and Cincinnati. The territories that Americans later called the Old Northwest and the Old Southwest filled rapidly, for the census counted fewer than 110,000 people west of the mountains in 1790 but nearly 2 million in 1820. The settlers organized new states to govern themselves: Kentucky in 1792, Tennessee in 1796, and Ohio in 1803. Seven more entered the Union between 1812 and 1821, all but Maine from beyond the mountains. The migrants came from eastern regions where large families, high land prices, and limited soil fertility had endangered prosperity in the late colonial era. New lands thus allowed them to escape a return into European-style poverty. President Jefferson welcomed the chance to multiply yeoman farms, and his views were widely shared. “If the --- cause of the happiness of this country was examined into,” Republican Albert Gallatin of Pennsylvania declared in 1796, “it would be found to arise as much from the great plenty of land in proportion to the inhabitants which their citizens enjoyed, as from the wisdom of their political institutions.” Whites could only expand at Indian expense. In theory, the United States recognized Indians’ rights to the land for as long as they wished to remain on it. In practice, federal officials assumed that Indians would have to sell as the white population increased. Like other nations, tribes could be forced to sign an unfavorable treaty after losing a war, but negotiators normally used bribery, threats, and alcohol to obtain a “voluntary” cession. Skillfully plying these methods, they gained title to most of Ohio at the Treaty of Greenville in 1795, and they steadily won more of the Northwest and Southwest in the next quarter century. But what should happen to the Indians themselves? Few whites would accept a perpetual Indian presence on the land. Some hoped that western Indians would simply disappear like so many had done in the East, but President Jefferson wanted Indians to embrace “civilization” and blend into white society. Forgetting that Indians had farmed for centuries, he repeatedly urged them to stop wandering and plant. He also wanted them to give up traditional gender roles, with men replacing women in the fields and women spinning and keeping house. An all-farm economy would require less land, so Jefferson believed that transformed Indians would happily sell their surplus acreage to whites. He also wanted them to turn their common fields into private property and give up tribal governments for white men’s laws. To encourage such changes, the administration gave seeds, tools, and instructions to the tribes and invited churches to send them teachers and missionaries. Jefferson’s “civilization” policy did not work as planned, however, for technological change did not make the Indians more willing to sell. Especially in the Southwest, it gave them more resources for land protection, and strengthened them for later confrontations. ### THE PROCESS OF SETTLEMENT As the government took possession of the West, federal surveyors marked it off in squares as provided by the Northwest Ordinance. The land law of 1796 continued existing sales policies but raised the --- minimum price to $2.00 per acre. If land failed to sell at auction, purchasers could buy it at the minimum price and take one year to pay. Reacting to steady pressure, Congress liberalized credit terms and gradually lowered the price and the minimum purchase until 1820, when a pioneer could buy as few as 80 acres for $1.25 an acre. The auctions were not always honest, for speculators might pay surveyors for inside information or collude to keep bidding low. Cash-poor squatters had to hope their little clearings would escape the auctioneer’s hammer and sell for minimum prices later on. Illegal settlers who lost their claims usually tried to sell their improvements to the new owners and squatted again a little farther westward, but potential for conflict between squatters and speculators was naturally high. Western migrants brought diverse cultures with them. Beginning in western New York, rural New Englanders dominated the northern Midwest and spread their values and customs as far as Michigan and Iowa. Upper South migrants took southern Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, and some clamored to bring slavery there. Other southerners carried slavery to Kentucky, Tennessee, and points south. New Englanders brought Congregational churches and village covenants with them; southern yeomen brought log cabins, split-rail fences, and rangy hogs to fatten in the woods. Their two streams joined in the early Midwest, but the Deep South reflected South Atlantic culture, spiced by French and Spanish influences. ### THE GREAT REVIVAL The settlement process included Indian warfare, animal attacks, backbreaking labor, gnawing hunger, and extremes of heat and cold. Pioneers included a disproportionate number of young men whose activities emphasized aggressive masculinity: militia musters, hunting trips, clearing forests, and guiding the plow. Whiskey was indispensable at every gathering and disputes erupted easily, not only over land titles but also over status and physical power. Violence and disorder could dominate frontier life. Disruption troubled sober-minded male and especially female migrants who longed for the civilizing influences of schools, governments, and churches, since religion seemed to falter in the post-Revolutionary generation. In the South, national independence had broken the weak Anglican establishment without providing any substitute. Leaders like Thomas Jefferson embraced Enlightenment deism, --- and the revolutionary writer Thomas Paine turned from political tracts to mockery of Christian revelation. New Englanders still used taxes to support their churches, but ministers bemoaned the “coldness” of their congregations. In 1798, a Scots-Irish Presbyterian minister named James McGready began fervent preaching in the roughhewn Green River district of southern Kentucky. Like a backwoods Jonathan Edwards, McGready offered vivid descriptions of heaven and hell that attracted crowds where sinners shouted, sobbed, and begged forgiveness. By the summer of 1800, his congregations were gathering in outdoor camp meetings to hear teams of preachers around the clock. Participants experienced a spectacular outpouring of religious emotion that ranged from the anguished guilt of penitent sinners to the ecstasy of the saved. The most spectacular occurred at Cane Ridge, Kentucky, where 20,000–25,000 people celebrated a four-day revival in 1801. The Great Revival, or Second Great Awakening, as it came to be called, spread rapidly over Kentucky, Tennessee, and southern Ohio. Reversing the pioneers’ route, it crossed the mountains to the Carolinas and Virginia, and then moved northward to western Pennsylvania. Helped along by rousing hymns and ardent personal pleas, revivals appealed especially to those with lower status in the secular world—women, youths, poor whites, and slaves. Like their predecessors in the First Great Awakening, the revivalists were evangelicals who valued a sincere conversion experience above complex doctrine. As preachers, they preferred immediate inspiration and emotional fervency over dry book learning and formally prepared prayers or sermons. Though some favored schooling more than others, many successful revivalists lacked traditional theological training, and trimmed the classic Calvinist conversion from a period of months or years to a few days or hours. Salvation became democratized as self-taught preachers took the gospel beyond a predestined few to all who opened their hearts to God and valued personal devotion over dry reason or distant church authorities. Irresistible feelings swept some participants into “exercises,” or uncontrollable tears, laughter, paralysis, or fits of violent trembling called “the jerks.” These displays could repel conservative Christians, and resulting disputes produced new denominations like the Disciples of Christ and the Cumberland Presbyterians. Many Methodists and Baptists embraced the new measures and eventually displaced Presbyterians as America’s largest evangelical denominations. The evangelicals’ emphasis on personal experience --- over abstract doctrine matched the democratic spirit of the era and continued to energize American Protestantism. The revival’s greatest impact came when the shouting died down. Much like the Puritans, evangelical churches kept close watch on their members and punished misbehavior with penance or expulsion. Some converts inevitably relapsed, but ministers reported that most reformed their lives and worked to build the churches, schools, colleges, voluntary associations, and local governments that would bring order to a rapidly growing frontier. Writing in 1810, a typical account from backcountry North Carolina reported that “from 1800, up to the present time, the progress of civilization And literature has been greater, than for perhaps fifty years Antecedent to that time. The great revival of religion about that period seems to have contributed much to the dissemination of morality, sound principles and good order in Society.” A later phase of the Second Great Awakening carried revivals to eastern towns and cities in the 1820s and 1830s, with important consequences for culture and politics. The reforming efforts of western and southern evangelicals took decades to fulfill, and their churches did not dominate their societies for many decades, but Cane Ridge had clearly launched a vital movement. In most ways, the revival movement shared little with the intellectual world of Thomas Jefferson, who venerated reason, balance, and moderation, shrank from emotional displays, and abhorred what he saw as fanaticism. Nevertheless, evangelicals ignored Federalists who charged Jefferson with atheism. Still an embattled minority, they remembered the burdens of an Anglican or Congregational establishment and applauded Jefferson’s defense of religious freedom. During his first year in office, Connecticut’s Danbury Baptist Association congratulated Jefferson on his election and protested the discrimination they still faced under state law. In reply, the president praised the First Amendment for “building a wall of separation between Church & State,” and encouraged the Baptists’ fight against church establishment. While Federalists defended orthodoxy, Jefferson’s Republicans attracted religious dissenters, from radical skeptics like Thomas Paine to fervent revivalists, and supported the nation’s increasingly voluntary approach to the support of religion. A Second War for Independence? As in the 1750s and the 1790s, American western expansion in the Jeffersonian era linked Indians’ defense of their homelands with Euro- --- pean power politics. When Americans cast longing eyes on Canada, Indians and the British again came together to defend the Great Lakes region, the remnants of what had once been known as the Middle Ground. War in Europe stimulated demand for American foodstuffs and products, but exposed American shipping to attacks and interference by the warring parties. Conflict over American ambitions in the Atlantic and on the frontier eventually brought another war with Britain. The first two Republican presidents, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison (who succeeded Jefferson in 1809) struggled to defend American interests on both fronts. Fearing Britain more than France, they adopted a series of economic measures to force British respect for neutral trading rights. They also struck back hard when northwestern and southwestern Indians united to resist American expansion. When economic measures failed against Great Britain, Jefferson and Madison both worried that national weakness sapped confidence in republicanism. They also faced unrelenting opposition from a Federalist minority who still admired Britain and despised all things Jeffersonian. Led by President Madison, the Republicans eventually decided that the preservation of republican government, control of the West, and true American independence required a second war with Great Britain. Every aspect of the War of 1812 would also reflect the deep-seated hostility between America’s political parties. ## COMMERCE AND CONFLICT After selling Louisiana and abandoning his effort to reclaim Haiti, Napoleon Bonaparte dropped the remaining vestiges of the French Republic, and proclaimed himself “Emperor of the French” in 1804. Still seeking to curb his ambition, Britain led a coalition of other European nations against Napoleon, so continued fighting drew men from farmwork and generated huge demands for food and resources. On the oceans, competing navies seized ships and sailors from merchant fleets, while military suppliers increased their orders for foreign goods. As the world’s leading neutral, the United States claimed the right of doing business with both sides, opening great opportunities and serious risks. The Napoleonic Wars advanced the dreams of Alexander Hamilton despite the political dominance of his opponents. Shipbuilding boomed in America’s ports, and sales of flour and salted meat soared wherever Americans could find a market. The value of American ex- --- ports rose from $33 million in 1794 to $97 million in 1801 and to $108 million in 1807. American sailing vessels probed ever farther, carrying cargoes to the Baltic, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, and even as far as China, as well as to the battling superpowers of western Europe. The United States not only remained Great Britain’s leading trade partner but its vessels transported French colonial products to Europe and dominated the Atlantic carrying trade. Mediterranean trade put Americans in contact with seagoing raiders from North Africa, where the rulers of Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli had long allowed the capture of European ships, crews, and passengers. The so-called Barbary pirates held their captives as slaves and demanded cash payments to buy off further attacks. The United States paid when its navy could not resist, but the pasha of Tripoli declared war when Jefferson stopped payment in 1801. In the First Barbary War, the US Navy and Marines fought Tripoli in a series of land and sea battles later remembered in the “Marines’ Hymn.” Tripoli agreed to peace in 1805, but Algerian raids persisted until the Second Barbary War of 1815. International conflict stalemated after 1805, with Britain controlling the seas and Napoleon invincible on land. Striving to end the deadlock, each side broke international law as it tried to restrict American trade with its adversaries. Based on longstanding resentments, America’s Republican majority hated Britain’s measures more, but Federalists felt the opposite. A key issue stemmed from Britain’s efforts to man its navy. Many British seamen sought relief from poor pay and brutal treatment by deserting to American vessels. Britain denied its subjects the right of renouncing their allegiance, however, and intercepted American ships to arrest or impress alleged deserters. Americans claimed that Britain impressed as many as 6,000 genuine Americans as well, and the US government seemed powerless to protect them. Another problem arose in 1806, when Napoleon proclaimed the Continental System, which forbade trade with Great Britain and ordered the seizure of neutral vessels that stopped there before sailing to Europe. Britain retaliated with the Orders in Council, which blockaded French-controlled ports and required neutrals to pay a fee before trading with Europe. Napoleon then ordered the seizure of any ship that obeyed the Orders in Council or even submitted to a British search. These competing decrees put all American trade with Britain or France in viola --- tion of one set of rules or the other, and led to the seizure of some 900 American ships between 1806 and 1812. British harassment punished France, but also protected British shippers by preventing neutral competition. Americans suspected that British actions were inspired more by economic calculation than by military necessity. Tension between the United States and Britain almost boiled over in 1807, when the British *Leopard* attacked the USS *Chesapeake* just outside the harbor of Norfolk, Virginia. The attack killed three American seamen, injured eighteen, and allowed the British to arrest four sailors they accused of desertion. Enraged by this humiliation but hoping to avoid war, Jefferson revived the tactics that defeated the Stamp Act. At his request, Congress passed a series of increasingly drastic Embargo Acts that eventually forbade all American commerce with foreign countries. Naively believing that America’s trading partners needed its products more than America needed theirs, Jefferson thought his policy would protect American shipping until other nations respected its rights. Instead, the Embargo Acts distressed the US economy as exports dropped from $107 million in 1807 to $22 million in 1808. The embargo failed to change British behavior but embittered New England, which heavily depended on international trade. Just as Jefferson left office in 1809, Congress replaced the Embargo Acts with the Non-Intercourse Act that only banned trade with Britain, France, and their colonies. As in the 1790s, international tension in the Jefferson and Madison years reverberated on the frontier and spawned rumors of secession, conspiracy, and foreign intrigue. After leaving the vice presidency in 1805, for example, Aaron Burr traveled up and down the Ohio and Mississippi to recruit participants in a shadowy plot to invade Spanish Texas or seize the lower Mississippi—no one was ever sure. The administration arrested Burr before his plans matured, but could not convict him of treason. ### TECUMSEH AND THE RED STICKS European and Atlantic conflicts intertwined with Native American resistance. After