surrendering most of Ohio in the Treaty of Greenville (1795), the remaining northwestern tribes had retreated to new towns in modern Indiana and Illinois and the upper Great Lakes region, where they struggled with disease and demoralization. Beginning in 1805, however, a Shawnee spiritual leader named Tenskwa- --- tawa, or "the Prophet," launched a new spiritual movement to revive Indian culture and reclaim Indian independence. Reviving the earlier teachings of Neolin, the Delaware preacher who inspired Pontiac’s War, Tenskwatawa urged the tribes to purify themselves by renouncing white culture, including tools, clothing, food, and alcohol, and prepare for an apocalypse that would destroy the whites and restore their former greatness. Also like Pontiac after the Seven Years’ War and Little Turtle in the wake of the American War for Independence, the Prophet’s brother Tecumseh began to add that Indians should unite, expel the whites by force, and create their own independent state in the Ohio Valley. The two brothers had lost their father in a pre-Revolutionary fight with pioneers, and then lost home after home when invading frontiersmen attacked their villages. Small wonder that Tecumseh had fought against Americans in their War of Independence and once more in the Northwest Confederacy of the early 1790s. Battered by smallpox and defeat, many Ohio Valley tribes thrilled to the message of Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa, and began to pull together in a new tribal confederacy. When less determined chiefs approved a massive and probably fraudulent surrender of land in 1809, Tecumseh traveled from village to village denouncing all land sales. In 1810, he and 300 warriors confronted William Henry Harrison, governor of the Indiana Territory, at his home and demanded the land’s return, insisting that “no tribe has the right to sell [land], even to each other, much less to strangers.” “Sell a country!” he reportedly continued. “Why not sell the air, the great sea, as well as the earth? Did not the Great Spirit make them all for the use of his children?” Rebuffed by Harrison, Tecumseh took his campaign southward and urged the Creek Confederacy to join him in war against the whites. Harrison worried increasingly that Tecumseh and the Prophet could indeed incite a war to reclaim the Middle Ground. His anxiety grew as tensions rose with Britain, prompting rumors of an Indian-British alliance in case of war. Unwilling to wait, Harrison struck first. In 1811, when Tecumseh was away, he marched on Tenskwatawa’s home village of Prophetstown, defeated the Indians at the ensuing Battle of Tippecanoe, and found a cache of British muskets. With Tecumseh still alive and active, reports swept the West that British agents had incited and supplied his followers, and pressure mounted for a full-scale war. Tecumseh had also won followers among the Creeks. Following the American Revolution, the Creek economy had suffered as the deer population thinned and whites moved ever closer to the tribal heart- --- land in modern Alabama. Spotting an opportunity, successive administrations tried to supplant the tribes’ traditions with gifts of plows, seeds, spinning wheels, and looms, hoping that Indians who lived like whites (whom they called “civilized”) would be more willing to surrender their lands. Closer to the advancing whites, inhabitants of the Creeks’ Lower Towns more readily accepted these overtures and increasingly substituted cattle ranching, cotton planting, and African slavery for older patterns of hunting and agriculture. Their leaders were often men of mixed parentage, whose Creek mothers gave them tribal membership while their fathers taught them skills and values from the white world that helped in gaining personal wealth, contrary to traditional notions of community property. They experimented with the gender roles preferred by whites, as men abandoned hunting and war and took over farming, leaving women with more domestic duties. The same men moved to create a strong tribal government that could protect their new possessions and enforce peace with the United States. Farther west, inhabitants of the Upper Towns resisted these changes and clung to traditional technology, gender roles, and notions of communal property. They especially resented white incursions and tribal laws to restrain their resistance. They accordingly listened carefully when Tecumseh urged them to reject white culture and join him in expelling the encroaching Americans. As tension mounted between the two Creek factions, traditionalists took the name Red Sticks after an ancient emblem for war. With supplies from British traders in Spanish Florida, the Red Sticks edged closer to a civil war with their tribal opponents, with significant repercussions for the growing conflict between America and Britain. # THE ROAD TO WAR In 1808, a solid Republican majority passed the presidency—and growing international conflict—from Jefferson to his longstanding lieutenant and secretary of state, James Madison. Many Republicans still believed that economic sanctions could protect American commerce from Britain without Hamiltonian measures like high taxes, expensive navies, standing armies, or war. Searching for a winning formula, Congress dropped restrictions on trade with France and England in 1810 but authorized the president to reimpose sanctions against one if the other promised to respect neutral rights. Napoleon offered misleading gestures of compliance but Britain refused to follow. The elections of 1810 brought a number of younger Republicans to --- Congress who would dominate ensuing decades. Men like Henry Clay of Kentucky and John C. Calhoun of South Carolina were too young to remember the Revolution, and even the party battles of the 1790s were distant memories to them. They would not tolerate American inferiority, however, and railed against British arrogance and Indian resurgence. "No man in the nation desires peace more than I," Clay told the Senate. "But I prefer the troubled ocean of war, demanded by the honor and independence of the country ... to the tranquil, putrescent pool of ignominious peace." Congressman Hugh Nelson agreed, and thought war would "shew that our republican government was competent to assert its rights, to maintain the interests of the people, and to repel all foreign aggression." Quickly labeled War Hawks, the insurgents stirred westerners to frenzy and promised to punish Britain by seizing Canada, but forgot that Republicans' long neglect of the military had left them with few land forces and no navy to speak of. Still hating Hamilton's Bank of the United States, they also created financial obstacles by allowing its charter to expire in 1811. Federalists fervently opposed war. Since losing in 1801, their party had contracted to a narrow base among the economic and political leaders of New England, and held about a quarter of the seats in Congress. Still convinced of their superior fitness for leadership, they viewed Republican measures with suspicion and contempt. Boston Federalist Josiah Quincy Jr. explained his opposition to the Louisiana Purchase, for example, by commenting that "nothing ... can seem politically good whose root springs on the other side of the political Equator. ... A pure stream cannot issue from a corrupt source." Though their own merchants were badly injured by British seizures, Federalists hated trade restrictions far more. Preferring a prosperous junior partnership with Britain to a costly war, they correctly argued that the nation was unprepared to fight and unprotected from attack. Going further, many Federalists saw the war as a Republican political stunt and an act of aggression to conquer Canada. "I regard this war, as a war of party, and not of the country," concluded Senator Rufus King of New York as the war began. "Whether we consider our agriculture, our commerce, our moneyed systems, or our internal safety," warned the party's *Alexandria Gazette*, "nothing but disaster can result from it." The advocates of peace did not prevail. When impressments continued and the Orders in Council remained, Madison asked for war on June 1, 1812. Congress agreed, with most Republicans voting in --- favor and most Federalists opposed. Ironically, word arrived weeks later that the British ministry had finally lifted its Orders in Council, but war continued for the sake of national dignity, and its results were nearly disastrous. ## THE COURSE OF COMBAT Fighting began with a luckless, three-pronged invasion of Canada. General William Hull invaded Ontario from Detroit, but hastily retreated before a combined force of British and Indians, led by Tecumseh. Chasing the Americans back to Detroit, the British and Indians briefly besieged its fort before a terrified Hull surrendered without firing a shot. Farther east, New York aristocrat General Stephen van Rensselaer crossed the Niagara River between Lakes Erie and Ontario, but had to return when his militia refused to follow. A third column under General Henry Dearborn headed for Montreal via Lake Champlain, but also faltered when militiamen halted. The Americans began to recover in 1813, when General William Henry Harrison recaptured Detroit, pursued Tecumseh and the British into Ontario, and defeated them at the Battle of the Thames. There Tecumseh lost his life, but supply problems prevented the victorious Harrison from following up his victory. To remedy such problems, the British and Americans both sought to control the Great Lakes with freshwater navies, leading to an American raid on shipyards in York (modern Toronto), Ontario, which ended in sacking the town. At the end of the summer of 1813, a hard-fought naval battle by Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry secured American command of Lake Erie and anchored American’s defense of its northwestern frontier. After another summer of inconclusive fighting, the war’s low point came in August 1814, when a British invading force penetrated Chesapeake Bay, landed in Maryland, and retaliated for the destruction of York by burning Washington, DC. Only prompt action by First Lady Dolley Madison and domestic slaves and employees saved some White House art and furnishings from the flames, including a copy of Gilbert Stuart’s famous portrait of George Washington that now appears on the one dollar bill. The Capitol was left in ruins. Soon afterward, an unsuccessful British assault on Baltimore inspired the composition of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” later adopted as the national anthem. America’s weak performance in the Great Lakes and Chesapeake theaters risked serious disaster, but its forces did much better in the --- Southwest. When the Creek government attacked supporters of Tecumseh, the Red Sticks retaliated with a broad attack against their tribal enemies, culminating in an 1813 attack on Fort Mims, Alabama, that killed as many as 500 whites, allied Creeks, and their slaves. In the aftermath, pro-American Creeks sought US government assistance, and the governor of Tennessee summoned militia general Andrew Jackson, a planter politician with fierce resolve and personal charisma. Quelling threats of mutiny and desertion, Jackson cornered the Red Sticks at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend in early 1814 and inflicted 800 casualties. After wresting a vast land cession from his Creek allies, he continued south to defend the Gulf coast. With an army of 10,000 men, Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane and General Sir Edward Pakenham hoped to strike a decisive blow in late 1814 by capturing New Orleans, the economic choke point for the entire western territory. Jackson invaded Spanish Florida and expelled a small British force from Pensacola before racing to New Orleans. The British attacked on the morning of January 8, 1815, but Jackson’s polyglot force of frontier militia, skilled artillery, free blacks, and pirates from the surrounding bayous inflicted terrible damage on their bungled charge, with 2,000 British casualties but only 70 American. General Pakenham died in combat and the surviving troops had to retreat. National honor seemed vindicated at last, and Americans celebrated Jackson’s triumph far beyond its actual military significance. Much about Jackson’s wartime performance presaged what his friends loved and his enemies hated about his later career as president. He began the war by trumpeting American superiority. “Who are we?” he thundered in his 1812 proclamation to the Tennessee militia. *“And for what are we going to fight?”* The answer followed immediately. “We are the free born sons of america, the citizens of the only republick now existing in the world; and the only people on earth who possess rights, liberties, and property which they dare call their own.” Federalists surely groaned at such bombast but pugnacious frontiersmen cheered it. When pursuit of the Red Sticks carried that same militia deep into Creek country, supplies ran short, enlistment terms expired, and some troops demanded to go home. Despising weakness, Jackson would have none of it, and when six militiamen were condemned to death for desertion, he approved their sentences unflinchingly. Soon afterward, the Red Sticks too faced the bloody consequences of his wrath. Preparing to defend New Orleans, Jackson had proclaimed martial law, and refused to lift it after victory was secured. When a --- legislator protested, Jackson arrested him. When a federal judge intervened, the unbending general jailed him too, outraging defenders of the rule of law but pleasing admirers of a strong will and decisive results. In short, Andrew Jackson could be violent, ruthless, and indifferent to the rules when they stood in his way. He embodied frontier patriotism, championed the equality of white men with each other and their superiority over everyone else, scorned self-doubt, brooked no dissent, thrilled his admirers for defending their rights, and frightened his critics as a moral monster and potential dictator. His complex, polarizing character would leave a deep mark on American public culture, representing what some saw as the best and others the worst of his era. ### PROTESTS AND PEACE Federalist opposition to the war never abated. New England congressmen and legislators opposed new taxes, discouraged enlistments, blocked the use of their state militias, impeded war loans, and, imitating the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, threatened to interpose state power against a draft. When these measures failed, some Federalists suggested that New England leave the union or negotiate a separate peace, and the Massachusetts legislature called a regional meeting to discuss those steps in Hartford, Connecticut. Assembling in December 1814, the Hartford Convention took no immediate action but demanded a series of constitutional amendments to limit Republican power, including repeal of the three-fifths clause that benefited southern slaveholders. Unknown to all participants, the Hartford Convention and the Battle of New Orleans both occurred after British and American diplomats had already signed a peace agreement in the Belgian city of Ghent. The treaty did not mention any of the war’s major causes, but Britain and its allies had finally toppled Napoleon, so further bloodshed seemed pointless. Retreating from earlier pledges, the British did not demand an Indian buffer state around the Great Lakes, and left Tecumseh’s followers to face the Americans alone. Jubilant Republicans scoffed at the Hartford Convention, for Federalists seemed thoroughly discredited by their antiwar stance, and Republicans’ future dominance seemed secure. Peace brought widespread rejoicing. Contrary to predictions, Americans had failed to conquer Canada or humble Great Britain, but --- their triumph at New Orleans vindicated their citizen-soldiers. The outcome seemed to embody what headlines called "The Rising Glory of the Republic." A typical editor boasted, "This second war of independence has been illustrated by more splendid achievements than the war of the revolution." Others linked British defeat with Federalist overthrow. "The triumph over the Aristocrats & Monarchists is equally glorious with that over the enemy," wrote one. "It is the triumph of virtue over vice[,] of republican men & republican principles over the advocates and doctrines of Tyranny." At the very least, the war had made his countrymen "more American," Albert Gallatin reflected. "They feel and act more like a nation; and hope that the permanency of the Union is thereby better secured." * In 1789, Americans began to implement their Constitution with great concern about the character and stability of their republic. Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton led an effort to strengthen the government with economic programs to consolidate and pay its debts, raise its revenues, and administer its finances through a national bank. Virginians James Madison and Thomas Jefferson feared these measures would endanger liberty by creating a corrupt and despotic government that favored urban commerce over agriculture. They began opposing Hamilton inside George Washington's administration and took their opposition across the country when their arguments did not prevail. The resulting party system pitted Hamilton's Federalists against Jefferson's and Madison's Democratic-Republicans. The parties differed over more than economic policy, for Federalists trusted the established elite and Republicans favored greater power for common white men. Strongest in the South, Republicans defended slavery and benefited from the three-fifths clause over bitter Federalist objections. The French Revolution and its consequences drove party divisions ever deeper, as each side saw its opponents as the tools of foreign enemies in a worldwide struggle. As Republicans gained the upper hand, they sought a more loosely connected union than the Federalists, with room for popular power, local variations, rural interests, slavery, western expansion, and voluntary participation in unifying institutions like the churches of the Second Great Awakening. The War of 1812 severely tested this model --- of national unity and nearly broke it, but Republicans survived and so did their vision of for the republic. Limited government did not eliminate social or economic equality, but it did encourage white men like William Thompson and John Rutledge to feel equally free and respected, and allowed party rivals to compete politically without personal rancor. A Republican political monopoly was not sufficient for harmony, however, for Federalist decline required new channels for the debates that a changing society would generate. --- BRITISH NORTH AMERICA <table> <thead> <tr> <th>MN (TERR.)</th> <th colspan="3">L. Superior</th> <th colspan="3">ME</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td>WI</td> <td colspan="3" rowspan="3">Mississippi R.</td> <td>VT</td> <td>NH</td> <td>MA</td> </tr> <tr> <td>IA</td> <td>NY</td> <td>CT</td> <td>RI</td> </tr> <tr> <td>IL</td> <td colspan="2">L. Ontario</td> <td>Boston</td> </tr> <tr> <td>MO</td> <td>IN</td> <td>OH</td> <td>PA</td> <td>NJ</td> <td>DE</td> <td>MD</td> </tr> <tr> <td>AR</td> <td>KY</td> <td>VA</td> <td>NC</td> <td>SC</td> <td>GA</td> <td>FL</td> </tr> <tr> <td>LA</td> <td>MS</td> <td>AL</td> <td></td> <td></td> <td></td> <td></td> </tr> </tbody> </table> * Cities and landmarks shown: - Chicago, Vandalia, St. Louis, Indianapolis, Louisville, Cincinnati, Columbus, Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Buffalo, Albany, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Richmond, Lynchburg, Wheeling, Cumberland, Nashville, Memphis, Montgomery, Mobile, Natchez, New Orleans, Savannah, Charleston, Jacksonville, Montreal * Lakes shown: - L. Superior, L. Michigan, L. Huron, L. Erie, L. Ontario * Rivers shown: - Mississippi R., Ohio R. * Roads and canals: - National Road, Great Valley Road, Great Wagon Road, Coast Road, Erie Canal * Transportation legend: - Solid line: ROAD - Dotted line: CANAL - Thin solid line: Navigable River Scale: 0 - 250 - 500 mi Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic Ocean labeled on map. > MAP 4. Between 1815 and 1840, a broad expansion of transportation facilities sparked a major burst of economic change known as the Market Revolution. Map by Gabriel Moss. --- # CHAPTER 8 ## Market Revolution in the North, 1815–1860 > “I never cared much for machinery,” Lucy Larcom remembered. “The buzzing and hissing and whizzing of pulleys and rollers and spindles and flyers around me often grew tiresome. . . . In the sweet June weather I would lean far out of the window, and try not to hear the unceasing clash of sound inside.” Larcom’s feelings were not surprising, for in 1835 she had started factory work at the age of eleven and a half, working fourteen hours a day spinning cotton for the Lawrence Corporation of Lowell, Massachusetts. She later admitted that the mill was “not the right sort of life for a child,” but she had little choice. Her widowed mother badly needed Lucy’s wages of one dollar per week, as well her other daughters’ meager pay, to supplement what she earned by keeping a boarding house for Lowell “mill girls.” Hardship did not embitter Lucy Larcom, and she never lost her love of books and gift for poetry. As she grew older, Larcom published numerous poems and stories in the *Lowell Offering*, the workers’ literary magazine. She eventually became a teacher on the distant prairies of Illinois, gained higher education, and supported herself as a writer. For Lucy Larcom, mill work led to independence and fulfillment. Sarah Bagley’s experience was very different. In 1837, Bagley arrived at Lowell from a failing New Hampshire farm, and began work as a spinner to help her family. Over the next seven years, conditions deteriorated as managers