pressured other leaders, wrote for newspapers, gave speeches, and held rallies. Some states still chose their electors in their legislatures, and Jackson might well have triumphed if every state had held a popular vote, but in the end Jackson astounded his rivals by outstripping them where popular elections did take place. He also won the plurality of electoral votes, mostly from the South and West, but not a majority, so --- the House of Representatives had to choose a victor from the top three finishers. Jackson, Adams, and Crawford thus faced the House, with Speaker Henry Clay seeming to hold the balance of power. Clay and his supporters mostly voted for Adams, the second-place finisher, and made him president. Their choice reflected honest policy differences and perhaps the preferences of their states, but Jacksonians cried foul when Adams then made Clay his secretary of state, the usual stepping-stone to the presidency. Though rewarding allegiance with prized appointments became routine to later generations, republican sentiments condemned such behavior in 1825. Newspapers screamed “Bargain and sale!” and Henry Clay spent the rest of his life denying that he and Adams had struck a “corrupt bargain.” ### “THE SPIRIT OF IMPROVEMENT” President Adams quickly made things worse for himself. Like Monroe, he wanted to rise above factions, and rejoiced upon taking office that “the baneful weed of party strife was uprooted,” but he found that his refusal to play favorites left him friendless. Devoted to duty above popularity, the president used his first annual message (now known as the State of the Union address) to sketch an ambitious vision of national progress steered by a powerful federal government. He called for a national bankruptcy law, a uniform national militia, an expansion of the navy, more internal improvements, a national university, a federally funded program of scientific discovery, adoption of the metric system, and even an astronomical observatory. “The spirit of improvement is abroad upon the earth,” the president proclaimed, and “liberty is power.” Echoing covenant theology, he maintained that the United States could not preserve its liberty without using it constructively. If the voters resisted his grand visions, Adams told Congress to ignore them. “Were we to slumber in indolence or fold up our arms and proclaim to the world that we are palsied by the will of our constituents,” he asked, “would it not be to cast away the bounties of Providence and doom ourselves to perpetual inferiority?” In effect, Adams asked Congress to embrace broad construction of the Constitution and use its own wisdom to uplift a misguided populace. For politicians who were learning to steer by public opinion, the president’s views were starkly suicidal. Congressmen and the newspapers pounded Adams for his allegedly unconstitutional and undemocratic proposals, and the president achieved little in his single term. When he asked Congress to approve --- sending representatives to a gathering of Latin American diplomats in Panama, southerners denounced any meeting with racially mixed delegations. Adams’s efforts to negotiate a more favorable commercial treaty with Great Britain were likewise fruitless. Between his father’s presidency and his own, the terms of American political culture had decisively shifted, for the government could no longer function without the trappings, at least, of popular democracy. # Jackson Takes Charge Jacksonians began to shape a new vision of politics and government from the moment John Quincy Adams took office. Convinced that Adams and Clay had stolen the previous election, Jackson demanded vindication in 1828. His advisors responded with a new kind of election campaign, bypassing traditional elites and directly promising voters that Jackson represented “the will of the people” over the “corrupt bargain” made by Adams and Clay. Their efforts won Jackson a landslide in 1828, and the new president began remaking the office of president to reflect the new importance of party organization and popular appeal. ### REVIVING THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY Together with a circle of Tennessee friends, Senator Martin Van Buren of New York organized the general’s 1828 campaign. A tavern keeper’s son from the upstate village of Kinderhook, Van Buren embodied the republic’s open opportunities and rose in politics by diligent service to New York’s Democratic-Republican Party. There he learned the need for unity and discipline, since factionalism and personal quarrels would divide the party and allow the hated Federalists to triumph. His “Bucktail” faction (renamed the “Albany Regency” when he left for Washington) controlled New York with county, district, and state conventions to make party decisions and by using jobs and contracts to reward its friends and punish its enemies. Van Buren believed at heart that his Democratic-Republicans led the “many” in their eternal struggle against the “few,” but he valued party loyalty above all else in most practical matters. The openness of post-Revolutionary society allowed him to create the role of American professional politician. In 1824, party discipline led Van Buren to support the caucus candidate William H. Crawford, but 1828 was another matter. When John --- Quincy Adams abandoned Republican partisanship, Van Buren quickly switched to Jackson and vowed to unite Republicans against Adams and Clay. He began by writing Thomas Ritchie, Virginia’s most prominent editor, to insist that “we must always have party divisions and the old ones are best.” Why? “If the old [parties] are suppressed,” he candidly explained, “prejudices between free and slave holding states will inevitably take their place.” To quiet what Jefferson had called “a fire bell in the night,” Van Buren proposed the *substantial reorganization of the old Republican Party,* based as in Jefferson’s day on an alliance “between the planters of the South and the plain Republicans of the north.” Appealing to Virginia’s Old Republicans by implying a revival of strict constructionism, Van Buren vowed to brand his opponents as Federalists, a role that fit John Quincy Adams perfectly. Ritchie, Calhoun, and Crawford accepted Van Buren’s logic and so did most of their followers. Pro-Jackson editorials blossomed everywhere, and a Nashville corresponding committee mailed reams of letters urging support and spreading campaign news while avoiding policy commitments. The Jacksonians stressed that Adams, Clay, and their friends had abandoned republican virtue to think only of themselves. Ordinary voters could recognize the common good and act on it far better than these “aristocrats,” so the only way to cleanse the republic was to honor “the will of the people” and make Jackson president. In the words of the *U.S. Telegraph,* Jackson’s chief Washington newspaper, Old Hickory’s cause was “the great cause of the many against the few, of equal rights against privileged orders, of democracy against aristocracy.” Adams’s supporters denounced Jackson as a gambler, a duelist, and a bloodthirsty tyrant who executed deserters without mercy. They even called Jackson and his wife, Rachel, adulterers and bigamists who married before her divorce became final. Democrats struck back with absurd charges that Adams was a degenerate aristocrat who put a billiard table in the White House for immoral gambling, and had pimped for the czar of Russia while growing up abroad. They likewise turned his European diplomatic experience against him, claiming “it was there that he learned the superiority of a monarchical over a democratic government . . . and [that] the people were not calculated to govern themselves.” These wild charges sprang from the sudden need to stretch over the heads of established leaders to reach the voters directly. The politics of mass appeals had overturned the courteous discourse of gentlemen --- and would not be abandoned, whatever the costs in logic or civility. When Rachel Jackson died soon after her husband’s victory, the general blamed Henry Clay for the sexual smears that seemed to have broken her heart, and branded him “the basest, meanest scoundrel that ever disgraced the image of his god.” In the end, Jackson triumphed easily, with 56 percent of the popular vote and 176 out of 261 electoral votes. Once again, his support came from the South and West, joined by New York and Pennsylvania. Adams limped in with New England and the tariff-conscious states of Kentucky and Louisiana. Without committing himself to specific actions, the Old Hero had captured republican nostalgia. When he arrived in Washington, still in mourning for his wife, Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster made an accurate prediction: “I think he will bring a breeze with him.” # THE SPOILS SYSTEM Andrew Jackson’s inauguration became a legendary symbol of the people’s rise to power. After a solemn ritual at the Capitol, crowds thronged to the White House reception. *“The Majesty of the People* had disappeared,” shuddered one society matron, replaced by “a rabble, a mob, of boys, negros, women, children, scrambling, fighting, romping.” Aides hustled the nearly smothered president back to his hotel, but destruction continued until waiters set tubs of punch on the lawn and the crowd followed. Official Washington looked on in horror and warned of worse to come. Unfazed by this embarrassment, the new president immediately turned on his critics in Washington’s tiny bureaucracy. Convinced that corrupt careerists had conspired against his election, he proclaimed that no one had a permanent right to office, and dispatched aides to uncover embezzlement, fraud, or incompetence. He quickly replaced suspected culprits with loyal Democrats, leading Adams men to charge that he practiced New York-style machine politics by substituting cronies and hacks for experienced civil servants. Jackson defended “rotation in office” as essential in a people’s government, but a New York senator coined a more memorable phrase. “To the victor belong the spoils of the enemy,” crowed William L. Marcy, and ever since, the “spoils system” has meant the use of government jobs to reward political operatives. Jackson did not invent the spoils system and he did not abuse it as badly as many of his successors, but he fought corruption with a practice that eventually increased it. --- # INDIAN REMOVAL Jackson also moved quickly to change Indian policy. The federal government had long desired Indian lands, but also declared that peaceful Indians could keep their homelands as long as they wished and provided them with tools like plows and looms to permit survival without departure. Sharing his constituents’ contempt for native culture and denying that so-called savages had any rights to land wanted by white people, Jackson had vowed to end this contradictory program. Soon after taking office, he moved to expel all Native Americans from east of the Mississippi to an “Indian territory” now in Oklahoma. The new policy applied to all the eastern tribes but especially affected the “Five Civilized Tribes” of the Southeast: the Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminoles. These nations had always been more populous and unified than those of the Northeast, and they still controlled some 50 million acres when Jackson took office. Their customs were also changing rapidly by the 1820s. Urged by missionaries and the federal government, Indian women were leaving agriculture to work indoors, while men abandoned hunting and replaced them in the fields. Along with white gender roles, many Indian families adopted white religion, clothing, and houses, and some leaders operated cotton plantations with black slaves and brick mansions. Such changes did not reduce their determination to keep their traditional territories and to hold them in common, however, but only strengthened their resistance to white demands. Cultural adaptation had spread most among the 15,000 Cherokees, who lived on 10 million acres in northwest Georgia and nearby areas of North Carolina, Alabama, and Tennessee. Though whites frequently declared that the Indians were simply wandering hunters, one leader insisted in 1826 that “there is not to my knowledge a solitary Cherokee to be found that depends upon the chase for subsistence.” By 1825, a Cherokee silversmith and blacksmith named Sequoyah had devised a system for writing the tribal language, and the *Cherokee Phoenix*, a newspaper printed in English and Cherokee, circulated widely. Led by Principal Chief John Ross, a prosperous and well-educated “mixed blood,” Cherokees adopted a written constitution, with an elected government and a professional police force to keep order and repel intruders. A new tribal law imposed the death penalty on anyone who tried to sell tribal land. White Georgians did not welcome these changes, for in 1802 they had surrendered their far western land claims on the condition that --- the federal government would soon give them title to all the remaining Indian land in the state. After years of fruitless waiting, Georgia decided to force the issue when prospectors found gold in Cherokee territory. Knowing Jackson would sympathize, Georgia passed laws to abolish the tribal government in 1830, to subject all Indians to its own laws, and to grant all tribal lands to white Georgians by a lottery. State law barred Indian testimony against whites, so a wave of white intruders assaulted Cherokees and freely seized their property. Jackson announced that he could not help because Georgia had unlimited power over its inhabitants; to keep their sovereignty and lands, the eastern tribes must make new homes in federal territory, beyond the Mississippi. In 1830, Democrats introduced a bill in Congress authorizing the president to negotiate removal treaties, pay individuals for improvements such as houses and fields, assign new tribal territories, and transport the Indians westward. Inspired by missionaries to the Indians, northeastern congressmen resisted without success. Early in 1830, the Indian Removal Act passed the Senate easily but squeaked through the House, 102 votes to 97. Cherokees fought back in court, with two important results. Chief Justice John Marshall dismissed the case of *Cherokee Nation v. Georgia* (1831) by deciding that a tribe could not sue a state, but he did recognize tribes’ limited rights of self-government as “domestic dependent nations.” When Georgia required licenses for all missionaries, two refused and appealed their convictions. In *Worcester v. Georgia* (1832), Marshall ruled for the missionaries, declaring that federal laws and treaties superseded the states in Indian affairs, so Georgia’s effort to rule the Cherokees had been unconstitutional. Georgia denied the court’s jurisdiction, however, and observers agreed that the state would never obey the court’s decision. To avoid a constitutional crisis which might destroy the principle of judicial review, intermediaries negotiated a settlement whereby Georgia’s governor pardoned the missionaries and they left the state, leaving no case for the court to settle or for Georgia to defy. In later years, the story spread that Jackson had flouted the Supreme Court by remarking, “John Marshall has made his decision, now let him enforce it.” Jackson did side with Georgia in these cases, but legally speaking, there was nothing for him to enforce. Faced with these defeats, a few prominent Cherokees decided that continued resistance was useless. Falsely claiming to speak for the --- tribe, they agreed to removal in the 1835 Treaty of New Echota. Despite this fraud, the federal government enforced the treaty by rounding up the Cherokees in 1837 and sending them across the Mississippi on the “Trail of Tears.” Nearly one-fourth of them died along the way. Upon their arrival in Indian Territory, unknown assailants carried out the penalty for selling tribal land by killing the leaders of the “treaty party.” Jackson’s successors continued his policy until most Indians had left the East and only scattered communities who submitted to state authority remained. ## INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS AND NULLIFICATION Jackson had soft-pedaled economic questions while campaigning, but he privately believed that government support for economic change would tempt lawmakers and businessmen to trade favors corruptly. He acted on this view in 1830 by vetoing a bill to buy stock in Kentucky’s Maysville Turnpike Company. In his eyes, the project was local rather than national, the Treasury was empty, and repaying the national debt was more important. Above all, he cited the same concern as Presidents Madison and Monroe: the Constitution did not mention federal aid to internal improvements, so it must be unconstitutional. Friends of internal improvement swore political revenge, but even Kentuckians accepted the Maysville veto and Jackson gained popularity as a friend of strict construction. The protective tariff posed a more serious problem. Northern manufacturers wanted protection from European imports, and northern farmers did not object because prospering factories boosted their crop sales. Most planters hated the tariff, however, because they grew far more cotton than northerners could buy. Protection only raised their costs while cutting their revenues, they thought, since Europe bought less cotton when Americans shopped at home. When Congress raised rates in 1828, southerners condemned the measure as a “Tariff of Abominations,” and they were not satisfied by modest reductions in the Tariff of 1832. South Carolinians were especially angry. Planter grandees blamed the tariff for their weak recovery from the Panic of 1819, but worried even more over slavery. With a population that was mostly enslaved, more than 90 percent in some coastal parishes, the state’s gentry were hypersensitive to economic burdens. Slavery could not last if the tariff consumed its profits, they reasoned, and how could whites survive --- if blacks ran free to seek vengeance? In South Carolina, the tariff was more than an economic or constitutional issue; it seemed to be a question of survival. Andrew Jackson made no commitments on the tariff. Like the South Carolinians, he was a cotton planter who believed in states’ rights, strict construction, and slavery, but thought both sides exaggerated the tariff’s effects. He also still remembered supply problems in the War of 1812. Jackson also hated the national debt, wanted tariff revenue to pay it, and needed support from both sections. He had thus backed a “judicious” tariff in the campaign and left voters to decide what that meant. As South Carolina’s leading politician, Vice President John C. Calhoun held a difficult position. Personal disputes had soured his friendship with Jackson and ended his policy influence. He badly wanted to be president himself, but had no chance without solid backing from his own state. When reckless planters began threatening secession unless the tariff was ended, Calhoun sought an alternative that would save the Union and his own career. Turning away from the broad national vision that had marked his postwar years, he embraced strict construction, states’ rights, and the Old Republican argument that a stronger federal government might interfere with slavery, and used these principles to attack the tariff. In the summer of 1828, Calhoun spelled out his new position in an anonymous “Exposition,” which, along with a more concise “Protest,” soon defined South Carolina’s position in the gathering crisis. The “Exposition and Protest” refined several ideas from earlier anti-tariff thinkers. Calhoun had to admit that the Constitution gave Congress clear authority to impose tariffs and other taxes, but insisted that the power only existed to raise revenue, not advance some economic interests over others. If protectionism did not break the *letter* of the Constitution, the “Exposition” claimed, it violated the Framers’ *intentions*, which made it unconstitutional. Knowing that Chief Justice Marshall would never accept this inference, Calhoun declared that the states did not need the courts to interpret the Constitution. Recalling the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 and 1799, the “Exposition” called the Constitution a “compact” that states could interpret for themselves. If a state considered some federal law unconstitutional, it could “nullify” it with a special convention and block enforcement within its boundaries. A national constitutional convention must then rule on the dispute, but --- the injured state could secede if it could not accept the outcome. Calhoun hoped that the threat of nullification would mollify his state’s hotheads long enough to negotiate a settlement. Instead, Carolinians embraced his theory wholeheartedly and called a state convention that nullified the tariffs of 1828 and 1832. Even fellow southerners questioned Calhoun’s constitutional reasoning, and most Americans thought Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster effectively demolished it in a debate with his South Carolina counterpart Robert Y. Hayne. Webster insisted that the Constitution was not a compact of the states but an agreement among “we the people,” who had given the courts the power to interpret it. Above all, he denied that membership in the Union and respect for its laws truly abridged the freedom of a state or its people. Coining a classic patriotic slogan, Webster cried for “Liberty *and* Union, now and forever, one and inseparable!” Andrew Jackson did not like protectionism but hated defiance of his authority even more. He also despised Calhoun, and when Congress considered the Force Bill to implement the tariff, he loudly threatened to march into South Carolina at the head of an army and hang its leaders if necessary. A bloody civil conflict suddenly seemed imminent, until Senator Henry Clay found a solution in early 1833. Though he strongly favored protectionism, Clay proposed to lower his treasured tariff gradually until protection ended in 1842. This compromise gave manufacturers time to adjust but promised to end the system that nullifiers hated. As part of the agreement, Congress asserted federal supremacy by passing the Force Bill. Calhoun agreed to the plan, and Clay won credit as the “Great Compromiser” who had once more saved the Union, just as he had in the Missouri controversy. While Jackson’s support of the Force Bill frightened many southern conservatives, South Carolinians realized they were not yet ready for the most extreme assertions of states’ rights, at least so long as controversy focused on economic matters instead of slavery itself. Determined to have the last word, however, South Carolina nullified the Force Bill, a closing gesture that everyone else ignored. ## War on the Bank The most dramatic controversy of the Jackson administration was the president’s effort to destroy the Bank of the United States. The Bank War was so divisive that it precipitated formation of the Whig Party --- and disturbed national politics from Washington down to