William Byrd is best known today for his detailed and perceptive diary. It reveals a man of great learning and sharp wit who excused his nonchalant brutality with superficial piety. Remembering a visit to Williamsburg in October 1709, he noted, “I sent for the wench to clean my room and when she came I kissed her and felt her, for which God forgive me.” Another entry complained of a slave’s cooking. “Moll had not boiled the bacon half enough,” Byrd noted casually, “for which I gave her some stripes under which she beshit herself. . . . I said my --- prayers and [retired with] good health, good thoughts, and good humor, thank God Almighty.” With no restraints on their authority, other slaveholders could be equally callous. Public institutions in the southern colonies bolstered the actual and symbolic power of men like William Byrd. Planters dominated Virginia’s county courts and constructed substantial brick courthouses that resembled their own impressive mansions. They raised an even more splendid edifice for the House of Burgesses and the rest of colonial government, and in 1693 founded the College of William and Mary to train their sons. In South Carolina, westerners had to transact legal business in Charles Town, for its assembly refused to create local governments that might empower nonslaveholders. Anglicanism was the established religion of the southern colonies, but the Church of England remained weak. In the most affluent parishes, vestries levied taxes to construct substantial churches and fill their pulpits with ministers who blessed the planters’ power. Less developed neighborhoods often sheltered religious dissenters or resented a costly establishment, so they neglected church construction and hired poorly qualified clergy or none at all. Unlike the French and Spanish, moreover, the English made few efforts to convert slaves or Indians to Christianity. Anglican weaknesses left the southern colonies open for future generations of evangelists. Despite the fundamental inequality of white society, its tensions slowly abated as race replaced class as the strongest measure of social distance. Seeking allies against a possible slave revolt, planters reached out to poorer whites. As the Indian population declined, ex-servants gained land more easily and thus the right to vote in provincial elections. Candidates learned to treat their poorer neighbors with greater respect and the simple possession of white skin became a valuable new privilege. The wealthiest whites did not always welcome this development, but they submitted to it. “I am sensible of many bad consequences of multiplying these Ethiopians amongst us,” wrote William Byrd in 1736. “They blow up the pride, and ruin the Industry of our White People, who seeing a Rank of poor Creatures below them, detest work for fear it should make them look like Slaves.” Colonel Byrd could commit these words to paper in a letter to an English friend, but he would probably hesitate to utter them at a militia muster or a market day where common white men might overhear. Paradoxically perhaps, the growth of liberty and equality for white men depended in part on the spread of black slavery. --- # THE BACKCOUNTRY SOUTH Plantations were scarce in the southern backcountry because high transportation costs absorbed agricultural profits. Most slaveholders owned no more than 5 or 10 workers and lived in sturdy homes of clapboards or squared logs, dressed themselves and their families in rough work clothes, and usually worked in fields beside their slaves. Known as yeomen, after the class of small, land-owning cultivators of rural England, the majority owned no slaves but purchased 100 or 200 acres from the Crown or the Carolina proprietors and cleared out small farms with the labor of neighbors and family. Poorer folk, who rented their land or squatted without permission on clearings in the wilderness, lived in an even simpler style. Backcountry settlement lagged until the middle of the eighteenth century, when a second generation of Germans and Scots-Irish began to overflow from Pennsylvania. Clearing the Great Wagon Road from Lancaster, Pennsylvania, south into the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia, and across the Carolinas as far as Augusta, Georgia, these migrants became yeoman farmers and the first white inhabitants of the inland South. Far from established authorities, their communities sometimes suffered from corrupt local officials or from crime and social disorder that troubled orderly inhabitants like George Washington, who called the Shenandoah settlers "a parcel of Barbarian’s and an uncooth set of People." The labor of men and women was equally valuable in yeoman households. Men and boys performed heavy field work while women and girls devoted themselves to the preparation and preservation of food, the culture of poultry and vegetables, the production of textiles and clothing, and, of course, the care of many infant children. Westerners traded whatever they could at coastal or fall line settlements for items like iron, salt, and gunpowder that could not be made in their communities, but they had fewer commercial dealings than coastal residents. ## Life in the Middle Colonies Mostly founded after New England and Virginia, the middle colonies of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware mushroomed in the eighteenth century, growing from about 50,000 people in 1700 to more than half a million seven decades later. The Penn family’s willingness to sell fertile land at low prices made Pennsylvania and Delaware --- Colonial Society and Culture, 1676–1756 [Image: Circular illustration showing a man plowing a field with two oxen, followed by a woman holding a bundle of crops. The sun shines in the upper left corner, and a crescent moon with stars hovers above the woman’s head. Below the image is the caption: "VENERATE THE PLOUGH"] FIGURE 3. The eighteenth century brought growth and prosperity to Britain’s mainland colonies, and praise for yeoman farmers as ideal free citizens. Miscellaneous Items in High Demand, Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, LC-DIG-ds-04633. especially attractive, and their tolerant religious policies made them hospitable to foreign dissenters. New York’s policy of renting land within large privileged manors made it less desirable. The middle colonies supported large numbers of modestly prosperous yeoman farms that raised a wide variety of crops for sale and family consumption. Slavery was present, but it coexisted with family labor, hired workers, and indentured servitude. Commerce encouraged the growth of towns, while social, economic, and ethnic diversity marked the entire region and laid the basis for a lively and contentious public life. FARMS AND RURAL LIFE Rural dwellers of the middle colonies developed customs and land-use patterns that characterized much of the American frontier in the eigh- --- teenth and nineteenth centuries. As many as half the inhabitants were tenants or laborers at any one time, but land was affordable and most white men could reasonably aspire to owning their own farms eventually. Families dispersed their farms across the landscape and did not build large plantations or cluster in villages like some New Englanders. Their farms were about 50–300 acres in size, but few households could till that much at one time. Much like their kinfolk in the southern backcountry, yeoman families often lived in log cabins that they copied from the early settlers of New Sweden, and raised corn, pigs, and a few cattle. Stout split-rail fences enclosed the fields while the animals fed themselves by roaming the woods until a fall roundup, followed by fattening and slaughter. This system allowed families with little or no land to raise numerous livestock, but prevented them from renewing their fields with the animals’ manure. European observers criticized this wasteful practice but farmers persisted, for as Thomas Jefferson said, “We can buy an acre of new land cheaper than we can manure an old one.” They also squandered timber by girdling trees to clear land, cutting the bark around their trunks and later burning them. Plowing was impossible until the stumps rotted, so families used hoes to plant corn in hills, or small mounds, instead of rows. Households concentrated on their own welfare and valued self-reliance, but no family could perform all its tasks alone. Neighbors remained very important for activities like barn raisings, quilting bees, and cornhuskings. Local communities tended to be informal clusters of similar folk rather than government entities like New England towns. To make cooperation easier, relatives and people from the same ethnic groups tended to stick together, seeking out neighbors who knew their language and customs and shared their views about schools and churches. Some rural counties in the middle colonies were virtually all German or all Scots-Irish, while others resembled checkerboards of different religious and ethnic communities. Families could get by on corn, pork, and garden vegetables, with some wool and flax for simple clothing, but they also needed a cash crop to pay taxes, buy or rent land, and purchase things they could not make themselves, like shoes, tools, iron, and salt, or modest luxuries like sugar and tea. When the fields were ready and the farmer could afford a plow and a team of horses or oxen, he usually supplemented his corn with wheat, the favorite commercial crop of the middle colonies. Wheat suited the local soil and climate, it needed little labor between --- sowing and harvest, and it did well on farms of any size, so farmers could raise it without slaves or servants. Ground by water-powered grist mills, wheat flour commanded a ready market in southern Europe and in the West Indies, and also provisioned the numerous ships that stopped at Philadelphia. Unwilling to stake all their hopes on one crop, however, farmers also sold corn, livestock, and flaxseed, while farm women sent large quantities of butter and cheese to market. Unlike large plantation owners, small farmers in the middle colonies and elsewhere had to be cautious about raising crops for sale. If William Byrd faced crop failure or low tobacco prices, he could sell some spare acres or even some slaves to buy food for the rest without damaging his entire plantation. If the same thing happened on a 100-acre farm, the family might go hungry or lose their land and the independence that came with it. Especially where poor transportation or uncertain market conditions made commercial agriculture unreliable, farmers were careful to raise the family’s food supply first, selling the surplus only when subsistence needs were satisfied. Unlike tobacco, wheat was an ideal cash crop in this respect, for families could eat it if a short harvest left no surplus. Judging from their choices of crops and their marketing decisions, mid-Atlantic yeoman families worked hard to attain simple comforts and to leave something for their children, but they avoided commercial gambles that might imperil their competency, or modest financial independence. Economic historians have called this practice safety-first farming. Family farmers sold market crops within safe limits, but they also protected themselves by careful self-sufficiency in food and other basic necessities. They were also reluctant to undertake difficult improvements of doubtful immediate usefulness, like soil conservation. This pattern of semisubsistence farming and extensive land use would be commonplace in the future of rural America, much to the dismay of later commercial boosters and agricultural reformers. The middle colonies prospered under this system, however, and became famous as a fertile region where humble immigrants could flourish by hard work and steady habits. Pennsylvanians liked to call their colony “the best poor man’s country.” ### TOWNS AND CITIES Rural prosperity encouraged the growth of towns and cities in the middle colonies, for the export of commercial crops required mer- --- chant shippers and port facilities, and farmers wanted artisans to make their houses, furniture, shoes, tools, and finer clothing. With 24,000 inhabitants by 1760, Philadelphia was the largest city in the colonies and one of the largest in the empire—about the size of Dublin, Edinburgh, or Bristol—while New York and Boston ranked second and third. A network of smaller towns also dotted the landscape, offering local farmers a place to sell their crops, shoe their horses, order clothes, buy a drink, cast a ballot, or tend to legal business. The top ranks of urban society included the leading merchants and shipowners who controlled the import and export trade, together with the lawyers and imperial officials who made their residences in colonial capitals. Families like the Livingstons and DeLanceys of New York City composed an urban gentry who often competed in factional disputes to control colonial politics and enjoyed an opulent lifestyle in elegant urban townhouses. Their counterparts in Philadelphia were a Quaker elite who lived more simply but exercised a similar power in provincial affairs. Beneath these wealthy families, a solid stratum of smaller businessmen and successful artisans composed the middle ranks of urban society. Many of these had been among the thousands of skilled redemptioners and indentured servants who entered the middle colonies during the eighteenth century to work in the region’s towns and cities. Gaining their freedom, these men and women found that hard work and frugality could bring modest prosperity and respectability. Colonial towns also housed a population of poor and disabled inhabitants who needed public charity, as well as a sometimes-unruly group of laborers, apprentices, sailors, and slaves. Colonial towns were diverse and robust places that offered challenges and opportunity to a variety of inhabitants. The Philadelphia printer and politician Benjamin Franklin was the preeminent representative of urban life and ambition in the middle colonies. Born in Boston in 1706, Franklin was a talented printer’s apprentice when he escaped from his overbearing master (who was also his older brother) to seek his fortune in Philadelphia. Working for wages at first, Franklin later used his own press to publish the *Pennsylvania Gazette*, one of the colony’s first newspapers, and his famous pamphlet series, *Poor Richard’s Almanack*. The almanac was an annual calendar of planting directions and astrological data, but Franklin spiced it up with pungent sayings and proverbs that reflected the ambitions and mobility of the surrounding --- society. "Waste not, want not," Poor Richard reminded his readers, and "God helps those who help themselves," while "A Ploughman on his Legs is higher than a Gentleman on his Knees." Poor Richard's advice to work hard, live frugally, and stay out of debt resonated powerfully with the common sense of farmers and artisans anxious to earn their own competence, even when the lure of imported luxuries outweighed this good advice from time to time. Reflecting the wisdom of semisubsistence farmers who expected to raise their own food but also hoped to sell something in the marketplace, Poor Richard advised readers to "plough deep while Sluggards sleep, and you shall have Corn to sell and to keep." Franklin's own life seemed to be an apt illustration of the benefits of his suggestions, for his successful printing business enabled him to retire at the age of 42, and devote the rest of his long life to science, philanthropy, and public service. Most artisans and apprentices in colonial Philadelphia could only dream of such success, but Franklin's words and example both reflected and encouraged the aspirations of their society. ### SLAVES AND FREE BLACKS ### IN THE NORTHERN COLONIES Without plantations, the middle colonies had a limited but still significant demand for slave labor. The Dutch brought slaves to New Netherland and so did the English, initially from the West Indies and later from Africa. The black population of New York's southern counties exceeded 16 percent as late as 1750, and proportions were similar in northern New Jersey. Benjamin Franklin owned as many as five slaves in his early career, and printed advertisements for slave sales and runaways in the *Pennsylvania Gazette*, though he turned against slavery near the end of his life. Throughout the countryside, most slaves worked by ones and twos for the region's more prosperous farmers, but a few masters held 20 slaves or more. Wealthy urban families used slaves as status symbols, dressing them in velvet coats and powdered wigs to work as domestic servants, while other slaves toiled in the streets as artisans, teamsters, and laborers. One New Jersey iron mine employed over 200 bondsmen. Northern slaves shared the grievances of their southern counterparts, and northern whites were as likely as white southerners to crush their protests violently. In 1712, two dozen New York City slaves tried --- to launch a general insurrection by setting a building on fire and then killing 9 whites and wounding 6 others as they rushed to fight the blaze. Whites retaliated by burning 20 convicted rebels at the stake and beating another to death. A generation later, the city panicked again when a series of mysterious fires broke out in the spring and summer of 1741. When a handful of black and white suspects were arrested, an accused white servant launched a spree of executions by describing a widespread conspiracy by slaves and poor whites to burn the city, kill or rape its white inhabitants, and create their own government. Before the summer was over, almost half the city’s adult male slaves had been jailed and at least 26 blacks and 4 whites had been hanged or burned. Many of the condemned were surely innocent, but plans for a real insurrection may indeed have inspired the alleged New York Slave Conspiracy of 1741. ## Changes in New England The descendants of Puritans continued to populate eighteenth-century New England. Their farms and towns flourished like those of the middle colonies, but their unique religious heritage made little room for immigrants. By the early eighteenth-century, however, the intensity of early New England had begun to fade. The rising generation honored their faith and the notion of covenant, but hard work and diligence had brought material rewards and accompanying temptations. A bloody purge of accused witches in Salem, Massachusetts, was the most conspicuous symptom of the social strain. ### The Tensions of Trade and Religion As in the middle colonies and the South, the population of New England grew sharply in the eighteenth century, rising from about 90,000 in 1700 to almost 600,000 by 1770. Rising generations spilled out from the oldest settled regions, pressing north and west into Maine (still part of Massachusetts), New Hampshire, and the interiors of Massachusetts and Connecticut. Slavery was more limited than in the middle colonies, though Rhode Island merchants and shipowners became leaders in the slave trade and brought home Africans like Venture Smith to work in their fields and households. New England’s economy grew to match its swelling numbers. Its thin, rocky soil favored pasturage over wheat fields, so New England- --- ers raised livestock and caught codfish instead. Like flour, pickled beef and salted fish would sell in most markets around the Atlantic basin, and New England merchants were particularly active in provisioning the sugar islands. These activities stimulated shipbuilding and commerce, not only in Boston but also in Newport, Salem, and a string of smaller ports. Like the middle colonies, New England continued to develop an urban network, a population of free skilled workers, and a concentration of cash in the hands of merchant families who would finance later developments. Venture Smith likewise found opportunity in this economy to buy his freedom and then secure his livelihood. The key difference between eighteenth-century New England and the middle colonies lay in the continued importance of religious distinctiveness. Nobody used the word "Puritan" much in the eighteenth century—New Englanders spoke about "orthodoxy" or the "Standing Order" before settling on "Congregational" as the customary label for their region’s established churches. Uniformity had eroded since the seventeenth century, for the Crown had finally forced the dissenting colonies to stop persecuting Anglicans, Quakers, and other non-Puritans. Orthodox leaders still believed in their godly covenant, however, and supported their churches with public taxes. Tensions between religion and material prosperity had long troubled New Englanders and they intensified in the eighteenth century. Preachers demanded that all good Christians work hard in their callings, for honest work was a blessed spiritual discipline. Like living a moral life, worldly success could be a sign (though never a cause) of God’s blessing, so ministers expected the saints to prosper. But what if the desire for worldly success overwhelmed the spiritual fervor that should inspire it? "The *Cursed Hunger of Riches,*" the Reverend Cotton Mather warned, "will make man *break through* all the Laws of God." Unfortunately, neither Mather nor his colleagues could be sure where godly diligence left off and the sins of greed and pride took over. He could only remind them that "when Wealth is more unto us, than the Creator of all our Wealth; Here, is Criminal Covetousness." Cotton Mather’s own career illustrates the transitional character of New England religion in the early eighteenth century. Born in Boston in 1663, he came from a distinguished line of Puritan ministers. His grandfathers had been towering spiritual patriarchs in early Massachusetts Bay, and his father, Increase Mather, had been minister of Boston’s Second Church, president of Harvard College, and Massachusetts’s colonial agent. A brilliant youth, Cotton Mather entered --- Harvard at the age of 12, already determined to follow his forebears in the ministry, and was ordained in his father’s church in 1685. Mather devoted his life to sustaining the Calvinist tradition, but rival denominations and religious indifference kept advancing, along with doctrinal quarrels among the faithful themselves. Groomed to succeed his father as president of Harvard, Mather never won the post, partly because his theology had become so old-fashioned. Even so, Mather embraced new ideas in other fields. He supported nondenominational benevolent societies to relieve social problems that an earlier generation might have left to God’s care. He was likewise an intense and highly accomplished scholar who published more than 400 books, pamphlets, and sermons, and whose thinking reflected an earnest desire to combine conservative theology with a respect for science and the direct observation of nature. Defying public opinion, Mather strenuously defended the dangerous and newfangled idea of