prosperity, complacency, and sin? Fears that the republic might fall even faster than it rose drew attention to America’s imperfections and stimulated religious revivals and a wide-ranging movement for reform. ### THE POSTWAR MOOD President James Monroe captured an important facet of the national mood in his 1816 inaugural address in which he ignored obvious evils to boast “how near our government has approached perfection.” Other public figures agreed and pointed to the war’s results as signs of divine favor. “Was not the Lord of Hosts with our republican armies?” cried a Vermont orator. “Did it not ‘please the Almighty’ to give victory?” On July 4, 1815, the first Independence Day since the coming of peace, similar sentiments echoed in village assemblies from Maine to Georgia. National pride reached beyond military and political achievements to embrace the economic and technological improvements brought by --- the Market Revolution. In 1824, Massachusetts orator Edward Everett spoke for many when he reminded Harvard’s Phi Beta Kappa chapter of “the intensest activity” in American cities, the agricultural innovations in the countryside, and the spreading network of roads and canals that linked the two. “Abroad,” he boasted, “our vessels are beating the pathways of the ocean white; on the inland frontier, the nation is journeying on, like a healthy giant, with a pace more like romance than reality.” In short, beamed Everett, “the country is growing with a *rapidity* without example in the world,” while “arts, letters, agriculture, all the great national interests, all the sources of national wealth are growing in a ratio still more rapid.” Beneath all the fanfare, not everyone was confident and some were even worried. In the spirit of Puritan jeremiads, cautious observers warned once again that a successful republic depended on virtue, and loss of it meant ruin. Boston’s 1815 Independence Day orator remembered that “military corruption or political depravity, the mad ambition and profligacy of rulers, or the degeneracy and debasement of the people, can . . . eradicate the principles of liberty, blast the hopes of refinement, and bring back another age of darkness and barbarism.” Lyman Beecher was more direct. “The bible is denounced,” he cried. “The sabbath is profaned; the public worship of God is neglected; intemperance hath destroyed its thousands, and is preparing the destruction of thousands more; while luxury, with its diversified evils, with a rapidity unparalleled, is spreading in every direction, and through every class.” Wealth and progress were especially perilous, for without moral and religious restraints, the golden calf of riches could bring wickedness and retribution. “All which is done to stimulate agriculture, commerce, and the arts,” Beecher thundered, “is . . . but providing fuel for the fire which is destined to consume us. The greater our prosperity, the shorter its duration, and the more tremendous our downfall, unless the moral power of the Gospel shall be exerted to arrest those causes which have destroyed other nations.” In the minds of moral and political sentries like Beecher, America teetered on a brink. A glorious future beckoned, but one false step and the world’s only major republic could perish. ### TROUBLING SYMPTOMS Throughout the country, social and economic changes associated with the Market Revolution were inflaming the evils that critics de- --- plored. As the children of marginal yeoman families trekked away from long-settled areas, they also left the restraining influences of traditional homes, churches, and local governments. Was it surprising that the president of Yale accused Maine frontiersmen of "prodigality, thoughtlessness of future wants, profaneness, irreligion, immoderate drinking, and other ruinous habits?" Roughhewn revivalist Lorenzo Dow agreed, calling northern Vermonters "the offscouring of the earth ... [who] ran hither for debt ... to avoid prosecution for crimes, and ... to accumulate money." Another critic called frontier Kentucky "Rogues Harbor," where "murderers, horse thieves, highway robbers, and counterfeiters fled ... until they combined and actually formed a majority," forcing "the honest and civil part of the citizens" into vigilante justice. Disorder was especially troublesome in the nation's rapidly growing cities. From 1790 to 1860, the proportion of Americans living in urban areas quadrupled, from 5 to 20 percent. New York grew even faster, doubling its population between 1814 and 1834 while quadrupling its crime rate. Whether they came from rural America or distant lands like Ireland and Germany, the newcomers escaped their employers' oversight as traditional households of masters and apprentices fell apart, and struggled for livelihoods in the sweatshops and "putting out" industries fostered by the Market Revolution. Working-class women who freely roamed the streets and mocked traditional restraints on feminine behavior especially worried urban authorities. With even less supervision, migrant bachelors fanned across the country to labor on large-scale construction projects like the Erie Canal or the growing network of railroads. Roman Catholic immigrants were especially alarming to traditional American Protestants, and many observers likewise worried that the newcomers' tolerant attitudes toward alcohol fostered poverty and crime. The urban problems that disturbed antebellum reformers were often quite real. Modern historians have verified that Americans of the 1820s and 1830s drank an average of seven gallons of pure alcohol per year—more than twice as high as modern levels and enough for two shots of 80-proof whiskey a day for every American over fifteen. Resulting problems with alcoholism, violence, and domestic abuse could be devastating for the individuals involved and dangerous for their communities. In addition, the new economy did not provide a decent livelihood for everyone. When new production methods sidelined artisans, --- poverty could send whole families into ill-paid urban industries that left them hungry and cold. Conditions grew worse in times of financial distress; New York charity workers counted 8,000 paupers during the Panic of 1819 and 13,000 a year later, and estimated that 50,000 were unemployed in New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore in the same period. Even in good times, the incomes of day laborers and pieceworkers fluctuated wildly with the weather and similar seasonal conditions. Traditional systems of poor relief and charity predictably crumpled under the strain. Almost inevitably, poverty and urban crowding led to poor sanitation and disease. Urban doctors reported that thousands of poor families lived in single rooms or cellars only 10 feet square, with virtually no light, ventilation, or clean water. “In these places, the filth is allowed to accumulate to an extent almost incredible,” reported Dr. John Griscom in his 1845 account *The Sanitary Condition of the Laboring Population of New York*. “The walls and windows . . . become broken, the doors and floors become injured, the chimneys fill with soot, the whole premises populated thickly with vermin, the stairways . . . the receptacle for all things noxious, and whatever of self-respect the family might have had . . . crushed under the pressure of the degrading circumstances.” With no knowledge of germs, physicians like Dr. Griscom still knew that these conditions were “productive of the most offensive and malignant diseases,” including yellow, typhoid, and scarlet fevers, as well as smallpox, cholera, measles, tuberculosis, and rheumatism. Even worse, according to urban missionaries, crowding exposed children to nakedness and sex, so as one put it, their minds and morals “become greatly debased, and [their] fall before the assaults of vice become[s] almost certain.” In the missionaries’ view, poverty injured morals as much as health, and both doctors and ministers cried out for urgent remedies. ### REVIVALS IN THE NORTH The Second Great Awakening began in the rural South, but it heavily influenced Americans’ responses to antebellum social problems as it spread to the growing towns and cities of the North. As northern ministers watched disorder mount in their own section, they began to see the appeal of revivals as potential answers to what they perceived as a flood of national sinfulness. National confidence bolstered their efforts. In the optimistic atmo- --- sphere of the early republic, Americans increasingly expected to shape their own futures, including their moral lives and spiritual prospects. Even among Calvinistic Congregationalists and Presbyterians, ministers relaxed or even discarded the doctrine of predestination, and taught instead that God would open heaven to all who sought it sincerely. Theologians like Rhode Island’s Samuel Hopkins and Yale’s Timothy Dwight went further and taught that the best way to demonstrate one’s love of God was to show “disinterested benevolence” to others and seek to convert them as well. Fortified by this blessing of individual efforts for personal and social improvement, evangelical religion became a powerful force to reorder a seemingly chaotic society. Beginning in the 1820s, the first and greatest example of its power appeared when the northern phase of the Second Great Awakening blossomed along the path of New York’s Erie Canal. The “Big Ditch” had unleashed rapid social change in a rural backwater populated mostly by migrants from western New England. Canal towns like Buffalo and Rochester grew quickly, moral standards relaxed, and transient canal workers collided with pious country folk. Rapidly expanding commerce rewarded avarice and double-dealing and ignored drinking, cursing, and Sabbath-breaking, while the New Englanders’ high moral expectations collided especially harshly with the frontier’s imperfect reality. Soon after the canal’s completion in 1826, sober residents welcomed the revival ministry of the Reverend Charles Grandison Finney, a tall, handsome preacher with a riveting gaze and commanding personal presence. Befitting the new nation’s confidence in personal freedom, Finney ignored the riddles of predestination and put the responsibility for salvation squarely on the individual, titling his most famous sermon “Sinners Bound to Change Their Own Hearts.” After successful appearances throughout the canal district, Finney led a climactic six-month campaign in Rochester in 1830–1831 that brought thousands to repent their sins and embrace new lives committed to God and personal reform. Most of Finney’s converts were not the transient laborers whom many residents associated with disorder, but leading townspeople who seemed to blame themselves for a lack of moral leadership. Prosperous women came first, followed by their husbands and other male relatives. Ambitious clerks and workingmen came next, perhaps influenced by the example of their employers. Inspired by the revival, converts rushed to join churches and reform their personal behavior. The women dedicated themselves to creating Christian homes and bring- --- ing their families to Christ, while their wayward menfolk swore off idle diversions like liquor and cards and pledged to purify their working lives by dedicating their business pursuits to God. If they could not persuade all their rowdy employees to imitate them, they would enforce evangelical morality with strict regulation of taverns and working-class amusements. The formula worked. In the next generation, the fires of revival and reform swept western New York so often it became known as the "Burned-Over District," and Finney carried revivalism to his own enormous church on Manhattan's Broadway. Finney became so good at leading revivals that he wrote an instruction manual for others, *Lectures on Revivals of Religion*, and baldly admitted that revivals were not spontaneous acts of God but human contrivances to be used for God's purposes. Initially, orthodox clergy like Lyman Beecher complained of Finney’s exuberant methods and slipshod theology, but they could not resist his success. Beecher became the foremost advocate of moderate revivalism in New England, and convinced most rural and small-town Congregationalists that ardent preaching and sincere efforts at personal and social reform could update and reestablish Puritan values in a changing world. He carried the same message to Ohio when he accepted the presidency of Cincinnati’s Lane Seminary in 1832. Influenced by Finney, Beecher, and their imitators, the northern middle class embraced evangelical Protestantism and tried to bring their version of moral seriousness to a turbulent American society. # Revivals and Reform The success of evangelical religion strengthened the drive to reshape America. For an influential minority of citizens, evangelical Protestantism became an inspiration for social improvement, and even social perfection, supporting new efforts in education, charity, and care for the disabled. Most important, the evangelical reform movement inspired a struggle against slavery and inspired female activists to challenge the restrictions of domesticity. ### NEW DENOMINATIONS AND COMMUNITIES Religious upheaval was not limited to the genteel families of mill owners. The democratic ethos of the revival touched thousands of --- Americans whose spiritual longings were unsatisfied by a growing economy and whose worldly fortunes suffered in the midst of apparent prosperity. Convinced that property and sexuality were instruments of the devil, for example, thousands separated from their spouses and possessions and joined communities of Shakers, who held all property in common and replaced conjugal marriage with vigorous community dancing. In the heart of the Burned-Over District, William Miller identified October 22, 1844, as the day on which the world would end. His prediction fell through but the Seventh-day Adventist church formed amid the fallout. In Boston and other New England cities, wealthy and sedate Congregationalists rejected the emotionalism of the revival, even as softened by Lyman Beecher. With a subdued and intellectual form of worship, these churches abandoned theological mysteries like the Trinity in favor of Unitarianism, while Universalist preachers taught rural and working-class Christians that God would save everybody. The most far-reaching denominational development of the Awakening era came from the prophecies of Joseph Smith Jr., a visionary youth whose impoverished family moved from Vermont to Palmyra, New York, in 1826. Located in the heart of what would become the Burned-Over District, Palmyra teemed with religious excitement as Presbyterians, Baptists, and Methodists all sponsored revivals and competed for converts. The Smiths struggled hard with meager prospects, and when they finally lost their farm, Joseph announced that an angel had shown him a pair of buried golden plates covered with strange writing, as well as a pair of sacred stones that allowed him to translate them. Over the next two years, Smith produced his translation of *The Book of Mormon*, which described an ancient Christian civilization in the Americas and foretold the Second Coming of Christ. Smith proclaimed *The Book of Mormon* a work of divine revelation equal to the Old and New Testaments, and began to draw believers to a new denomination, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Smith led his followers west in a series of moves, first to Kirtland, Ohio, then Independence, Missouri, and later to Nauvoo, Illinois. Over time, he promulgated the doctrine of “plural marriage,” which encouraged male Mormons to take multiple wives. At every stop, the Mormons increased their numbers but also encountered bitter persecution from traditional Protestants who viewed their scripture as blasphemous and their marital customs as immoral. Finally, in 1844, a violent mob murdered Smith and his brother, and Brigham Young as- --- sumed leadership of the church. Young decided to leave Nauvoo and led 12,500 refugees to safety in the Far West, reaching the site of Salt Lake City in 1847. Here the Mormons built a new Zion in the wilderness that flourished and eventually became the nucleus of the state of Utah. Shakers and Mormons were not alone in building utopian settlements. Dozens of planned reform communities flowered in the antebellum decades, especially in New England. Each was slightly different, but most renounced the individualist ethic of marketplace society and held all their property in common. In New Harmony, Indiana, a secular group under British reformer Robert Owen offered a utopian socialist community as an alternative to the factory system. In West Roxbury, Massachusetts, an adventurous group of intellectuals led by George Ripley founded Brook Farm in 1841 to practice Transcendentalism, a vague but influential philosophy that revered the spiritual power of “transcendental” forces in nature. At Oneida, New York, a particularly colorful group of idealists gathered around John Humphrey Noyes, who preached that the monogamous family hindered human improvement as much as private property, and practiced a kind of communal marriage among themselves. All told, at least 100 planned, utopian communities took shape in the United States between the Revolution and the Civil War, with the greatest number founded in the 1840s. Those with a religious basis or a charismatic leader like Noyes tended to last longer, but most broke up after several years. The communitarian movement was an unusual but emblematic example of the era’s faith in the power of love and reason to remake society around the principle of human perfectibility. ### THE BENEVOLENT EMPIRE Americans with no desire to renounce marriage or private property still tried to harness evangelical values for social improvement. Even before the War of 1812, conservative ministers had pushed back against irreligion and immorality by fighting to preserve state funding for churches in Massachusetts and Connecticut, the last states to require it. When disestablishment finally came to Connecticut in 1818 and to Massachusetts in 1833, however, ministers had already shifted their attention to voluntary efforts, recognizing that coercive methods would never work in a republic based on liberty. Outvoted by Jeffersonian democracy and discredited by their --- opposition to the War of 1812, New England’s fading Federalist elite found new roles by joining with pious merchants and idealistic college graduates to form voluntary associations for evangelical reform. The first was the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (1812), dedicated to supporting missionaries to the American Indians and to non-Christian countries like China, India, and Burma, as well as Africa. Almost simultaneously, the New York Tract Society and New England Tract Society formed to distribute religious leaflets to the poor, followed by the American Tract Society in 1824. The American Education Society (1816) supported young candidates for the ministry, and the American Bible Society (1816) aimed to place a Bible in every home. The American Sunday School Union took shape a year later to provide both religious and secular instruction to children whose parents needed their labor every other day of the week. The American Peace Society (1828) sought to end war. In 1826, the American Home Missionary Society pledged to send ministers to the unchurched West. The same year, the American Temperance Society began urging Americans to cut back on hard liquor, and it eventually renounced all forms of alcohol. Founded in 1828, the General Union for Promoting the Christian Sabbath fought a hard but unsuccessful campaign to stop business and travel on Sunday, including the operations of the Post Office. Taken together, these organizations wielded serious financial clout; from 1789 to 1828, the nation spent $2.8 million on the thirteen leading benevolent societies, compared to $3.6 million on internal improvements. Widely known as the “Benevolent Empire” or “Evangelical United Front,” these societies consciously imitated parallel organizations that had emerged in Britain a decade or two earlier in response to similar problems. With overlapping membership and common goals, the societies maintained that social disorder sprang from the neglect of evangelical Protestant Christianity. To reform the unruly and help the suffering, these societies resolved to bring them to God and instill the virtues of self-control: temperance, frugality, hard work, church attendance, and education. Especially in the cities, the societies’ agents, missionaries, and “friendly visitors” pursued this mission by entering the homes of the urban poor to pass out tracts and Bibles. There they faced the most urgent material needs of the poor, often for the first time. As one dismayed disciple reported, “Almost every-day brings me in contact with cases so appalling and distressing that it requires a nerve of steel to prevent the mind and body from sinking under per- --- petual excitement.” As evangelicals increasingly confronted the number and variety of suffering Americans, some put aside their missionary work for new benevolent societies that addressed these troubles directly. The practice of tackling common problems through voluntary associations spread beyond the Benevolent Empire to become a characteristic trait of early nineteenth-century America, and caught the attention of French observer Alexis de Tocqueville when he toured the United States in the early 1830s. In his famed analysis *Democracy in America* (1835–1840), Tocqueville marveled that “Americans of all ages, all conditions, and all dispositions constantly form associations. . . . The Americans make associations to give entertainments, to found seminaries, to build inns, to construct churches, to diffuse books, to send missionaries to the antipodes [i.e., the other side of the world]; in this manner they found hospitals, prisons, and schools. . . . Wherever at the head of some new undertaking you see the government in France, or a man of rank in England, in the United States you will be sure to find an association.” Tocqueville suggested that voluntary associations were essential to American democracy, because they gave the strength of numbers to otherwise weak individuals and trained them to seek the common good. Besides, he reasoned, the government would become tyrannical if it tried to enforce all the goals that associations pursued voluntarily. At the very least, voluntary associations won the hearts of critics like Lyman