aloof from other churches that condoned this error. Williams’s sermons frightened and outraged Governor Winthrop and the Massachusetts leadership. They had no intention of lecturing the king or tolerating heresy. More fundamentally, they feared that Williams demanded an impossible degree of perfection in merely human affairs, rejecting all compromises and undermining the flexibility their godly experiment required. When Williams would neither change his mind nor quit inciting disputes, they reluctantly ordered him to leave Massachusetts. In January 1636, Roger Williams and a small band of followers departed to found the dissenting colony of Rhode Island. A second controversy erupted the following year. Arriving with her husband in 1634, Mrs. Anne Hutchinson began to hold religious discussions in her Boston home, and suggested to her followers that most of the colony’s leaders were hypocrites who went through the motions of good behavior without a genuine conversion. Hutchinson strongly hinted that God identified the imposters to her personally and freed her from the need to obey them — a heresy known as antinomianism. Once again, an upstart was urging ordinary Puritans to spurn their leaders as damnable sinners. Anne Hutchinson was not only a woman who did not know her place, Puritan leaders feared, but like Roger Williams, her divisive teachings could stir up factions and tear the fragile colony apart. When the General Court summoned Hutchinson to account for herself, she skillfully parried their questions for two days, until she slipped and claimed to hear God “by the voice of his own spirit to my soul.” This was flagrant antinomianism. Unwilling to allow anyone’s inner voices to overturn authority, the court quickly ordered Hutchinson and a few of her followers to join Roger Williams in Rhode Island. Of her two favorite ministers, John Cotton escaped punishment, but John Wheelwright departed to become a founder of New Hampshire. Mrs. Hutchinson could not settle down, however. After four years, she and her family left Rhode Island for the neighboring colony of New Netherland, where Indians killed her in 1643. The patriarchs of Massachusetts Bay took grim satisfaction from her fate. “The Lord heard our groans to heaven,” wrote one, “and freed us from our great and sore affliction.” Rhode Island adopted town government, congregational churches, and many other institutions from the other Puritan colonies, but like Maryland, it granted liberty of conscience, or freedom from religious --- dictation, to all its residents. With Roger Williams as one of its leading citizens, Rhode Island became a beacon of religious tolerance, and irritated its neighbors by sheltering Baptists, Quakers, Jews, and other dissidents from Puritan orthodoxy. ## War and Transition As in the Chesapeake, the 1670s seemed to bring New England’s founding era to a close. Half a century after the Pilgrims established Plymouth, Puritan towns spread westward from Cape Cod to the Connecticut River Valley, and dotted the shores of Long Island Sound. Steady growth brought the problems of success, including warfare with Indians, whom the colonists defeated with bloody determination. Events in England forced conscientious New Englanders to rethink their mission, as English Puritans dealt with King Charles and fought a civil war without their help. As New England’s first generation gave way to the second, many ministers worried that rising prosperity and changing priorities were sapping religious devotion. In 1676, a renewal of Indian warfare demonstrated that New England could survive these challenges and keep expanding, redefining its sense of purpose without surrendering it. ### THE ENGLISH CIVIL WAR Back in England, political and religious tensions had continued to mount while the Puritan colonies were growing. In a bid for absolute power, Charles I had tried to ignore Parliament, until the need for money finally forced him to relent in 1640. The king resisted when Parliament tried to limit his power, and in 1642, the English Civil War broke out between supporters of the king and the Anglican Church on one side and Parliament and the Puritans on the other. Parliament’s army triumphed under Puritan general Oliver Cromwell and beheaded King Charles in 1649. Cromwell tried to rule England as a Puritan commonwealth without king or Parliament, but the experiment foundered when he died in 1658. The former king’s son had been waiting in France for just such a moment, and in 1660 he returned to England as King Charles II. The Restoration, as it was called, reestablished the monarchy, the Parliament, and the Anglican Church, and England turned firmly away from its Puritan revolution. Like the Puritan “republics” of New England, however, the commonwealth experi- --- ment in kingless government held enormous importance for the future American republic and fed many of the ideas that later supported its revolution. Virginia remained quietly loyal to the Stuart dynasty in the Civil War and Interregnum, as the period between kings was called, but New England’s position was more difficult. Its founders had planned to rescue England when its crisis inevitably arrived, but events moved too quickly in the end and English Puritans made their own decisions without consulting Massachusetts. American Puritans felt suddenly irrelevant and intensely disappointed, especially when the Restoration ended their hopes for a Puritan England. If God had further work for his chosen people, they must find it in America. Governor John Winthrop died in 1649, the same year as Charles I. While he was governor, the people of Massachusetts had gradually given more attention to their own problems than to those of England. They did not abandon the ideals of a covenanted people, but focused more on preserving their own colony than reforming all Christendom. In the future, the Puritans’ most serious challenges would come from the conflicts they found between their twin objectives of holiness and prosperity in America. ### THE SECOND GENERATION As New England continued to grow, Puritans increasingly wrestled with a painful contradiction. They worked hard and practiced self-denial to glorify God and avoid temptation, but these frugal habits could bring material success and even more temptation. The contradiction was less severe in rural communities where families struggled to feed and clothe themselves, and could not aspire to much more than supplying the next generation with enough land and household goods to start farms of their own. Family arguments were the biggest source of rural social tension, as long-lived parents tried to keep their lands and their children’s labor for as long as possible and young people longed to marry and start their own households. Most farm families supplied as many of their own needs as possible, but they also traded a bit in market towns, which allowed ports like Boston to swell with Atlantic commerce. New England merchants sent furs, fish, lumber, and foodstuffs all over the Atlantic basin in locally made vessels manned by local mariners. They returned with overseas cargo that ranged from sugar and tobacco to the finest silks --- and wines. As ports and merchants prospered, pious Puritans worried that the quest for profits and the lure of luxuries could undermine religious zeal. The most visible sign of spiritual malaise was the failure of the founders’ children to join their parents’ churches. Young people prayed sincerely for spiritual rebirth, but fewer of them experienced the transforming sensation that was still the test of true conversion. Most of them had been baptized as children because their parents had been church members, but could the children of these pious but officially unconverted Puritans be baptized as well? After long debate, the majority of ministers finally consented, and devised the so-called Halfway Covenant to cope with the new reality. After 1662, the child of a baptized but unconverted person could be baptized in turn, but could not be admitted to full communion until he or she reported a personal conversion experience. Arguments about the Halfway Covenant seemed to betray disunity and declining faith. Near the end of his life, Governor William Bradford mourned in his chronicle of the Plymouth colony that the founding spirit of mutual love and cooperation seemed to be lost: > “I have been happy, in my first times, to see, and with much comfort to enjoy, the blessed fruits of this sweet communion, but it is now a part of my misery in old age, to find and feel the decay and want thereof (in a great measure) and with grief and sorrow of heart to lament and bewail the same.” In eloquent sermons known as jeremiads, after the Old Testament prophet Jeremiah, vigilant ministers warned their flocks against declension, or a decline in religious standards. Over and over, they denounced the moral decay that seemed to follow success, and predicted that God’s wrath would destroy an errant people unless they repented and returned to primitive purity. > “We have in great part, forgotten our Errand in this Wilderness,” thundered Increase Mather, president of Harvard. “Although the Lord hath been calling upon us, not only by the voice of His servants, but by awful judgments, that we should return unto Him who hath been smiting us, yet men will not return every one from his evil way.” Dozens of less-famous contemporaries added their condemnations to Mather’s. The jeremiads could not bring everyone to repentance or distract many merchants from their business. Even in worldly Boston, however, life in 1660 or 1670 was still simple and straitlaced by the standards of a century later. But the fact that the sermons were preached, published as pamphlets, and purchased in large numbers reveals that --- the old perfectionist temper was not entirely dead. It had only changed its form, and would keep doing so as the burdens of the covenant continued to weigh uneasily on the spiritual heirs of John Winthrop. ## INDIAN WARFARE Like the Spanish, the French, and the Virginians, the Puritans had partly justified their migration to America by promises to convert the Indians to Christianity. Also like the Virginians (but not the Spanish or French), they did relatively little to practice this intention, and like most Englishmen of their day, distrusted the Indians as savage worshipers of Satan. Soon after his arrival, Governor John Winthrop rejoiced that the Indians “are all neere dead of the small Poxe, so as the Lord bathe cleared our title to what we possess.” The Reverend John Eliot worked hard to convert Indians in Massachusetts, and brought about 1,100 “praying Indians” to specifically designated towns by the mid-1670s, but most Puritans assumed that Indians should disappear like the Old Testament nations displaced from Canaan by the children of Israel. As in Virginia, however, the Indians did not decline nearly as fast as New England expanded, and the result was bloody warfare. In the Pequot War of 1637, Connecticut struck when Indians raided its frontier town of Wethersfield. Militiamen surrounded the Pequots’ main town when most of its warriors were away, set it on fire, and shot the old men, women, and children as they fled. Between 300 and 700 Pequots died in an hour. Over the following months, Massachusetts, Plymouth, and Connecticut militias captured most of the stragglers and sold those they spared into Caribbean slavery. The war did not end until settlers had destroyed most of the Pequot nation, but the victors assured themselves that “we had sufficient light from the Word of God for our proceedings.” Metacom’s War was an even deadlier conflict that ravaged New England in 1675 and 1676, almost simultaneously with Bacon’s Rebellion in Virginia. Both upheavals exposed deep rifts in the white community and aroused fears of a general uprising of Indians up and down the Atlantic seaboard. Whites were finally victorious in both, but the violence shook both colonies deeply and marked the end of their founding eras. By 1675, whites and Indians lived side by side throughout much of southern New England. Metacom, whom the English called King --- Philip, had replaced his father Massasoit as *sachem* of the Wampanoags, and lived on the eastern side of Narragansett Bay near the border between Plymouth and Rhode Island. His traditional enemies, the Narragansetts, held the opposite shore. There were also Nipmuck towns between Boston and the Connecticut River Valley, and the Abenakis held most of inland Maine. As New England grew, whites eyed Indian land with increasing jealousy, and rival colonies competed to acquire it. Indians’ resentment also grew as the English demanded more land, livestock raided their fields and clam beds, and colonial governments treated them as subjects instead of independent neighbors. Relations between the Wampanoags and Plymouth grew especially tense by the early 1670s. Plymouth protested loudly when Metacom sold land to the despised colony of Rhode Island, but Metacom countered that Plymouth was stealing tribal land for its own settlements. Deeply suspicious, colonial leaders listened carefully when a Christian Indian accused Metacom of plotting war, and believed his reports when the informer was found dead, seemingly murdered. Preparing for the worst, Wampanoags readied themselves for combat and struck the border town of Swansea when Plymouth executed the alleged killers. Massachusetts came to Plymouth’s aid, and counterattacks soon spiraled into general war, as rival tribes and colonies put aside their differences and united against each other. Powerful bands of English and Indians burned one another’s towns throughout New England and drove their inhabitants into fortified garrisons. In one of these raids, a party of Narragansetts kidnapped Mary Rowlandson, a minister’s wife from Lancaster, Massachusetts, who lived to publish *The Sovereignty and Goodness of God*, a model for innumerable other tales of frontier capture and rescue and one of the earliest books written by an American woman. Like the rebellious followers of Nathaniel Bacon, New Englanders responded to Indian trouble with indiscriminate violence against all the Indians in reach, even the “praying Indians” converted by John Eliot. As these measures succeeded in the winter and spring of 1676, Metacom sought the help of Mohawks from the Iroquois Confederacy, but they sided with his enemies instead. When Metacom retreated to the Wampanoag homeland on Narragansett Bay, a combined force of Indians and Plymouth militia captured and killed him, selling most of his people into slavery. The English lost at least 600 lives, 8,000 cattle, and 1,200 houses in Metacom’s War, proportionately the bloodiest in American history. Its --- expenses ran to £150,000. The Indians lost about 3,000 men, women, and children, their political independence, and most of their land. In the war’s aftermath, ministers hurled more jeremiads at their congregations, certain that God had sent calamity to punish a sinful people. Returning to the theme of declension, royal official Edward Randolph reported that the clergy pointed specifically to the declining church attendance, toleration of the persecuted sect known as Quakers, young people who dishonored their parents, men who grew long hair or wore wigs, and women who adopted “strange fashions in their apparel.” As Puritan zeal continued to wane, it would be harder and harder to combat the enduring appeal of “strange fashions,” despite the ministers’ best efforts. Isolated bands of Indians hung on in southern New England, and their descendants still live there, but the colonists subjected them to English control. The victorious colonies absorbed most Indian lands within their own boundaries, but they failed to wrest territory from their neighbors, except for Massachusetts, which soon swallowed Plymouth. Metacom’s War weakened colonies and tribes so badly that neighboring New York (the former New Netherland, which England acquired in 1667) and the Iroquois Confederacy soon replaced them as the dominant military powers in the northeast, the guarantors of its peace, and the lords of its fur trade. * Bacon’s Rebellion and Metacom’s War exposed deep rifts in the colonies they touched. Virginia’s poor attacked the rich, and New England colonies turned on each other in a scramble for Indian land. Presented with unmistakable signs of crisis, English authorities began to wonder if the colonies were misgoverned. Certainly New England’s semi-independent “republics” could not continue to imitate Cromwell’s commonwealth. At the very least, they reasoned, royal governors like Virginia’s should rein them in and perhaps impose even stricter controls. The coming years would see other important plans for subjecting all American colonies to tighter English control, and the loss of Massachusetts’s own treasured independence. Despite these setbacks, neither Bacon nor Metacom could permanently damage their targets. By the final quarter of the seventeenth century, Virginia, Plymouth, and Massachusetts Bay had burst their original boundaries to spawn Maryland, Connecticut, New Hamp- --- shire, and Rhode Island. Despite early hopes for coexistence, planters and Puritans had both proved willing to strike their Indian rivals with all the violence deemed necessary. Each region had deep roots in its parent culture, but each had developed its own way of life based on varying local conditions and the portions of English culture they imported. Heartened by the examples of Virginia and Massachusetts, other colonizers would continue to imitate them, soon creating a string of English outposts from chilly Newfoundland to the sunny Caribbean. --- <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="4" style="text-align:center;">MASSACHUSETTS</th> <th rowspan="8" style="text-align:center; vertical-align:middle;">Atlantic<br>Ocean</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td colspan="4" style="text-align:center;"> <span style="font-weight:bold;">British Controlled</span> </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="4" style="text-align:center;"> ■ French Controlled </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="4" style="text-align:center;"> ■ Spanish Controlled </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="4" style="text-align:center;"> □ Indian Controlled </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="4" style="text-align:center;"> Gulf of Mexico </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="4" style="text-align:center;"> 0 400 800 mi </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="4" style="text-align:center;"> JAMAICA PUERTO RICO </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="4" style="text-align:center;"> Caribbean Sea </td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="5" style="text-align:center;"> BARBADOS (GB) </td> </tr> </tbody> </table> > MAP 2. By the early eighteenth century, British, French, and Spanish colonies occupied eastern North America, but Native Americans controlled the continent’s interior and most of its land and resources. Map by Gabriel Moss. --- # CHAPTER 3 ## The Emerging Empire, 1676–1756 New York militia major Jacob Leisler gave his dying speech on a rainy May morning in 1691. With his son-in-law Jacob Milborne beside him, Leisler tried to explain their recent conduct in “great & weighty matters of State affairs.” Though penitent, Leisler still insisted “before god & the world that what I have done was for king William & Queen Mary, for the defence of the protestant religion & the Good of the country.” Moments later, the hangman tied his blindfolds, and the bodies of Leisler and Milborne swung lifeless from the gallows of Manhattan. Their severed heads would soon bear public witness to rebellion’s awful price. England had taken the Dutch colony of New Netherland in 1664 and a treaty of 1667 had formalized its new status. King Charles II had given the province to his brother James, the Duke of York, who renamed it New York and installed an autocratic government before taking the throne himself in 1685. At the time of Leisler’s Rebellion, a genuine crisis had gripped the colony and its neighbors, for England had toppled King James II in an upheaval known as the Glorious Revolution. The overthrow of New York’s official proprietor upset public authority and led to panic over imagined Catholic conspiracies and Indian attack. Ostensibly acting for the new sovereigns, King William and Queen Mary, and traditional English liberties, Leisler and his followers seized local power and held it for nearly two years. When royal authorities finally arrived to reestablish a lawful government, however, Leisler fired on their troops, so newly appointed governor Henry Sloughter resolved to make him an example. Under other circumstances, the governor might have shown mercy. Colonial upheavals did not always end with bloody reprisals. Leisler had acted in a real emergency, he was basically loyal, and he finally --- disarmed voluntarily. He and his followers also believed they had defended popular rights against arbitrary power, a belief that English events had seemed to confirm. But the new government was not secure and war had broken out with France. New York was a valuable port, vulnerable to attack by land and sea, and rife with ethnic and religious dissension. Above all, while Leisler had many supporters, he had also made many enemies who now had the governor’s ear. Sloughter would take no chances so early in his term, so Leisler’s disobedience cost him his life. In short, Leisler and his followers thought the principles of the Glorious Revolution should allow them local autonomy, especially in an emergency, but English authorities insisted on more-central control of their growing empire. Though founded