The seemingly wholesome Lowell experience reassured Americans who feared the grim conditions of English factories, and convinced many that manufacturing and commercial agriculture reinforced each other. A Maine editor credited *“a cotton factory”* for “the greater beauty of the farms, and the higher state of cultivation” in a nearby town, because it “furnished the ready home market for the wool, the hides, the fuel, timber, beef, pork, hay, butter, cheese, apples, cider, potatoes, and a great many other vegetables, besides eggs, lamb, veal, and many other things” produced on local farms. For many northerners, the editor’s observations proved the benefits of American freedom and the superiority of their own society. ### EARLY MASS PRODUCTION As factories spread across New England, a series of smaller-scale developments prepared the way for greater changes later. In government- --- owned armories at Springfield, Massachusetts, and Harpers Ferry, Virginia (now West Virginia), a few visionary officers and inventors tried to simplify battlefield repairs by making guns out of interchangeable parts. They faced serious technical hurdles, but began to succeed in the 1820s with elaborate systems for precisely measuring, holding, cutting, and molding metal. Their improvements continued in the following decades, with limited civilian applications before the Civil War. Other inventors tried using machines to make articles that were more complex than cloth. Unlike military officers, civilian businessmen wanted lower costs more than simplified repairs, so they worked on labor-saving devices instead of interchangeability. After patenting the revolving pistol in 1835, Colonel Samuel Colt used new machine tools to produce thousands of weapons for soldiers and civilians and made the single- and double-shot flintlock pistol obsolete. In the same period, Connecticut manufacturers devised machines to cut large numbers of cheap brass and wooden clock parts, until a simple windup clock cost no more than $1.50 by 1850, and peddlers could sell hundreds of thousands each year. Reversing the customary flow of trade, New England clockmakers even sold their products in Great Britain. Samuel Colt established an arms factory in London and astonished a committee of Parliament by declaring that “there is nothing that cannot be produced by machinery.” Interchangeable parts and early machine production paved the way for more extensive mass production later in the century. The new technology had dramatic effects. Home manufactures probably peaked in 1815, especially on major trade routes, but machine production of cotton cloth rose from 4 million yards in 1817 to 323 million in 1840, while prices fell by three-quarters. The impact of internal improvements and textile manufacturing ricocheted throughout the economy, as demand from railroads and machine production stimulated iron making and coal mining. The value of American manufactures increased by 59 percent in each census year between 1810 and 1840, exploded by 153 percent in the 1840s, and then returned to a growth rate of 60 percent in the final decade before the Civil War. Most Americans still lived on farms, and despite the rise of early factories, most workshops remained small, with fewer than 20 hands each in 1860. Even so, the once primitive American manufacturing economy had reached second or third place in the world when the Civil War began in 1861. --- # LABOR PROTESTS Machine production had costs as well as benefits, for artisans lost independence and income as goods became cheaper. Colonial Americans had classed “hirelings” with paupers, servants, and slaves as weak dependents undeserving of full equality. As the proportion of wage earners rose from 12 percent of the workforce in 1800 to 40 percent in 1860, some observers worried that “wage slaves” could never be prosperous or independent citizens. Labor reformer Orestes Brownson went further and condemned wages as “a cunning device of the devil” that gave employers “all the advantages of the slave system, without the expense, trouble, and odium of being slave-holders.” He longed instead to make every man “an independent laborer on his own capital, — on his own farm or in his own shop.” Unable to avoid wage labor, other workingmen organized to defend what Sarah Bagley’s Lowell Female Labor Reform Association called “the great principles of justice, equality and republicanism.” Early labor organizations grew out of eighteenth-century societies that enlisted both masters and journeymen, like New York’s General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen, but as competitive pressures increased, masters pushed for lower wages and longer hours while journeymen defended the opposite. In the first and second decades of the nineteenth century, these pressures led some journeymen to form separate organizations, agreeing with an 1817 declaration by the New York Typographical Society that “the interests of the journeymen are *separate*, and some respects *opposite* to the employers.” These early labor unions struggled to uphold craft traditions that celebrated artisans as crucial members of republican society and fought against measures that seemed to undermine them, including wage cuts, the twelve-hour day, and the use of poorly trained workers to underbid skilled mechanics. The first municipal labor federation, the Philadelphia Mechanics’ Union of Trade Associations, took shape in 1827. New York followed soon afterward, and both organizations conducted strikes and political experiments with Workingmen’s Parties (see chapter 11). The Lowell workers also “turned out” in 1834 and 1836 to protest wage cuts and rent increases in company-owned boardinghouses, and the same decade saw a wave of strikes by male workers in other trades. Even so, the right to strike was not well established, for in 1806, a Philadelphia court had convicted striking shoemakers of criminal conspiracy. The --- Massachusetts Supreme Court affirmed the right to strike in 1847, but employers still used courts to counter union activity. The Panic of 1837 undermined both unions and Workingmen’s Parties, but labor militancy became an enduring option for workers in asserting their own vision of republicanism for industrial society. # On the Move The Market Revolution put Americans in motion as never before. The forces that sent many rural Americans to industrial jobs were also at work in Europe, and launched a new wave of Atlantic migration, often from regions and ethnic or religious groups with little previous presence in America. Many of the newcomers joined native-born Americans in the nation’s growing cities, where they took the hardest and lowliest jobs. Americans also sought new lives across the Appalachian Mountains and created new communities on the frontier territories of the Old Northwest and Old Southwest. ### IMMIGRATION Even more than New Englanders, Europeans again strained their available resources in the early nineteenth century, for improvements in farming and sanitation had diminished epidemics and famines and doubled the population between 1750 and 1850. Beginning with Britain, western Europe had also seen improved roads, canals, railroads, and the introduction of factories, and just as in America, these innovations had undermined traditions, transformed agriculture, and revolutionized manufacturing. In the countryside, landlords owned most of the cultivated land, and sought to increase their profits by evicting tenants, consolidating plots, adopting new crops and machinery, and converting fields to pasture. Even more than in America, uprooted country people flocked to cities for new jobs and a fresh start, but often found low pay, grim working conditions, squalid housing, and dire poverty. Hoping for something better, some five million Europeans moved to the United States between 1815 and 1860, more than the entire US population in 1790. Forsaking their loved ones and native villages for a new country where labor was scarce and wages were higher, three million arrived between 1845 and 1854 alone, proportionately the greatest wave of immigration in the nation’s history. A few of these newcomers --- settled in southern cities, but most headed northward, where they would not compete with slaves and the diverse economy created more jobs. As its population swelled by one-third, America’s rapidly growing economy somehow absorbed the newcomers, though not without social, cultural, and political strain. By far the largest number came from Ireland. Most early Irish immigrants had been Scots-Irish Protestants, but those of the nineteenth century were largely impoverished Catholics fleeing eviction and famine. Even more than elsewhere, most of the land in Ireland belonged to absentee landlords who leased and subleased tracts as small as a single acre to farmworkers who used them to grow potatoes, a prolific and nutritious crop that the Columbian exchange had brought from South America. Seeking more profitable arrangements, ambitious landlords began consolidating these holdings in the 1820s, sending thousands of their former tenants to the cities of England and America. Departures swelled to a flood after 1845, when a deadly fungus cut the potato harvest by as much as 80 percent. Potato crops suffered everywhere, but especially in Ireland, where the poor ate little else. From a population of seven million, as many as a million people died of hunger and disease as the blight lingered for another seven years. Another million fled to America. The migrants traveled in the dark holds of American sailing vessels that carried timber and cotton in one direction and people in the other, in voyages that lasted from one to three months. Many were young people who hoped to bring their families later. Few could buy land in America, so they dug canals, built railroads, washed clothes, and served in middle- and upper-class homes. Concentrated in northeastern cities, the Irish-born constituted at least a quarter of the populations of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore by 1850, where poverty sent them to densely packed slums with inadequate water and sanitation. More-established Americans were often horrified and accused the Irish of increasing crime and the costs of public relief. Building on existing prejudices, Protestants often blamed these problems on the Catholic religion of the Irish or even their supposed racial inferiority. A second wave of newcomers came from the Catholic areas of southern Germany, where more debt-ridden peasants were losing their land to foreclosure and consolidation. Other German migrants ran the gamut from paupers to artisans to prosperous farmers. Some were liberal activists and intellectuals who fled repression after demo- --- cratic uprisings failed in 1848. A few were Jewish shopkeepers who continued in retailing, often starting as peddlers. On arrival, most German immigrants headed for midwestern states like Ohio, Illinois, and Missouri. With more resources than the Irish, some got land and returned to agriculture. Others headed for ethnic neighborhoods in new cities like Cincinnati, Chicago, and St. Louis. There, immigrants of every nationality built institutions for themselves, from stores and bars that welcomed their languages and stocked their favorite products, to schools, mutual aid societies, newspapers, theaters, sports clubs, churches, and synagogues. Less visible than the Irish or Germans, newcomers from Britain were the third-largest immigrant group in antebellum America, and they quickly blended with the existing population. Smaller numbers of antebellum migrants came from Scandinavia, Holland, and Canada. ## URBANIZATION Commerce and industry swelled the cities. The census of 1790 counted only 24 “urban” places of 2,500 people or more, but the 1860 tally put almost 400 towns on that list. Among them was Lowell, Massachusetts, whose locale contained no more than 200 inhabitants when the first factory arrived but 37,000 in 1860. The same census counted 8 American cities of 100,000 or more. In the same period, the number of urban dwellers in the northeastern states rose from one out of ten to one out of three, and the combined population of New York City and Brooklyn broke one million for the first time. Most immigrants had rural roots but settled in cities; at least one-third of urban residents were foreign-born in 1860. American cities had begun as small Atlantic ports, but those with inland access, like New York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, gained people along with trade. Boston flourished by supplying raw materials to the textile and shoe industries of surrounding towns. Cities also moved west, as interior ports like Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Chicago arose to handle the products of midwestern farms. Connections blossomed between growing cities until domestic commerce rivaled the importance of transatlantic trade. Cities also changed their shape and structure. Urban businesses had formerly clustered along the waterfronts, where merchants kept their warehouses, docks, and countinghouses. Rich and poor lived side by side, with wealthy families in imposing homes on major streets and --- the poor in alleys behind them. Artisans’ workshops and households appeared throughout the city. Lacking public transportation, most people walked from place to place, and tried to put their homes and shops as close to the city center as possible, pushing the disadvantaged to the city’s margins. These patterns began to change in the early nineteenth century. By separating home from work, new production methods broke up the artisan household, sending employers to comfortable residential neighborhoods and wage earners to crowded tenements. The distance between homes and jobs undermined the “walking city” and led to horse-drawn streetcars and omnibuses for urban transportation. Downtown centers for business and shopping drew away from industrial and residential neighborhoods, and a few wealthy residents began to commute from homes on the urban periphery that put city convenience in a semirural setting. From the bucolic society of independent yeomen envisioned by Thomas Jefferson, large parts of the United States were becoming the opposite by the outbreak of the Civil War—urban, industrial, wage earning, and dependent for every necessity on the ups and downs of the economic marketplace. ### MOVING WEST Restless rural families could also move west. When the War of 1812 quelled Indian warfare east of the Mississippi, millions of white Americans streamed across the mountains for new opportunities. In 1790, the white population of the Ohio country had numbered in the hundreds, but it rose to seven million by 1860, mostly from migrants and their children. Pioneers had created seventeen new states beyond the mountains by the outbreak of the Civil War. The federal government supported the pioneers by pressing the remaining Indians to sell their lands, surveying the public domain, and selling it in ever-smaller parcels on increasingly generous terms. Speculation flourished, for land values seemed bound to rise as population grew. In the Michigan Territory alone, pioneers and investors increased their purchases of public land from half a million acres in 1834 to 4.2 million acres two years later. Speculation was especially brisk at proposed town sites. “I have seen detailed plans, with straight streets and fine public squares scrupulously reserved, of cities which do not actually consist of a single street, of towns which hardly contain three houses,” marveled French traveler Michel Chevalier in 1836. “[S]everal --- of them have really become flourishing villages, although the dreams of their founders have not proved true." Many of these speculative villages vanished, but not all of them. The city of Chicago began with a visionary sketch in 1830 and grew to 4,000 inhabitants in 10 years. Strategic location and a crucial canal gave it control of transportation between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi basin, and key rail lines extended its reach still farther. As the transportation hub of inland America, Chicago became a center for manufacturing, meatpacking, and retail distribution. Its population broke 100,000 by 1860, placing the onetime speculative dream among the top ten cities in the nation. Speculation in future plantation districts was also fierce, as investors imagined vast future profits from growing cotton. "This country was just settling up," satirist Joseph Baldwin recalled as he later described what he called "the flush times of Alabama and Mississippi" in the 1830s. "Marvelous accounts had gone forth of the fertility of [the region’s] lands," bringing unmatched returns to slave labor. "The State banks were issuing their bills by the sheet, like a patent steam-printing press [producing] *its* issues; and no other showing was asked of an applicant for the loan than an authentication of his great distress for money. . . . Under this stimulating process, prices rose like smoke." Speculation was just as feverish north of the Ohio, until bubbles burst in both the Panics of 1819 and 1837. Prices and credit suddenly collapsed, land sales almost halted, and thousands went bankrupt when no one could sell or pay for the overpriced tracts they had bought with borrowed money. If they had the funds, more cautious settlers bought a few hundred acres of fertile wilderness to clear for farmland. The less fortunate squatted without paying, rented in hopes of buying later, or bought on credit and struggled to pay. Those who failed tried to sell their improvements to a newcomer and move west to start over. In the beginning, many families lived in crude log shelters and scratched a bare subsistence from tiny corn patches. Like Indians, they might earn cash by selling skins and furs. As settlements thickened and markets opened, they kept raising their own food but sold some for cash, just as safety-first farmers had done in the East. Before long, however, the combination of fertile soils and improved transportation allowed the Midwest to develop as a premier location of family-based commercial farming. Cheap western lands gave many hard-pressed easterners a welcome --- alternative to city life or rural poverty, allowed them to renew the ideal of yeoman independence, and incidentally eased competition for urban jobs. For those who moved and those who stayed behind, the combination of growing cities and western expansion calmed older worries that Americans would sink into European-style poverty when too many were crowded on a fixed quantity of land. # Society in the Free States The new economy reached into almost every corner of American society. Commercial agriculture linked farmers to the business cycle, pushed families west, and broke up old customs of swapping, bartering, and semisubsistence. Manufacturing raised new fortunes, created new occupations, and destroyed old crafts. Immigration diversified religion and culture while increased mobility rocked the stability of communities, traditions, and established elites. In the two generations between the elections of Thomas Jefferson and Abraham Lincoln, eighteenth-century notions of rank and deference gave way to a more impersonal culture of public equality among white men of the free states. But economic change also shaped a new class structure based on new sources of wealth for some and wage labor for others. Between the extremes, the “middling sort of people” from colonial days gave way to an urban middle class with new tastes, aspirations, and work habits. In middle-class families, changes in women’s lives were especially important in reshaping personal values, religious standards, community customs, and eventually the agendas of politics. ## EQUALITY AND INEQUALITY Eighteenth-century Americans had lived in a society of ranks, with a multitude of steps between the lowliest slave, the struggling laborer, the independent yeoman or artisan, and the gentleman with economic, cultural, and political power. In a vertically ranked society, everyone seemed to know who stood above and below, but ties between roughly equal people seemed less important. For example, masters, journeymen, and apprentices in the same trade might feel more in common with each other—despite their inequality—than with economic peers in other lines of work. Contemporaries frequently boasted that the American Revolution --- had opened a golden age of democratic equality that eliminated the class distinctions of aristocratic Europe. Foreign visitors frequently agreed. Ignoring the gulf between whites and blacks, and men and women, for example, French nobleman Alexis de Tocqueville opened his classic 1835 account, *Democracy in America*, by pointing to “the general equality of condition among the people.” The famous traveler did not mean that all Americans lived alike, but that class distinctions among whites were more open and flexible than in Europe because white men claimed political equality as their birthright. Certainly hopes of social and economic improvement lay behind the mass migration of poor Europeans to America, and reality anchored these hopes. Visitors seemed uniformly impressed that white Americans were better dressed, fed, and housed than their European counterparts. But while immigrants earned more in America than in the old country, ascent from wage earning to small business ownership was difficult and gaining true affluence was rare. One careful study of Poughkeepsie, New York, in the 1850s found that less than one skilled worker in four moved from earning wages to self-employment. In Poughkeepsie and Philadelphia, only 5–10 percent of manual laborers made this leap, but nonmanual clerks had strikingly better chances, with 25–38 percent of them becoming professionals or business owners in the 1850s. Stark economic differences therefore mingled with boasts of equality. Americans invented the word “millionaire” in the 1840s. There were 10 such New Yorkers in 1845 but 115 in 1860. John Jacob Astor, the city’s richest man, had prospered in the western fur trade, but the bulk of his $25 million fortune came from urban land speculation. In contemporary Boston, the Lowell mill complex made Francis Cabot Lowell and his fellow manufacturers almost as wealthy. By 1860, 1 percent of Bostonians owned 65 percent of the city’s taxable property and the top tenth owned 95 percent, but half the city’s people had none. Wealth was more evenly distributed in the rest of the rural North, but the top 1 percent of Americans still owned 29 percent of the country’s wealth in 1860. Economic historian Lee Soltow determined that almost two-fifths of America’s free men owned less than $100 worth of land or personal property that year, leaving them and their families with little more than their clothing and some meager household goods. Other historians have found that midcentury artisans earned about $300 a year but needed more than $500 for a minimal standard --- of living. The slim earnings of their wives