Act, responding to a 1794 enforcement crackdown by closing local courts and burning the home of their --- chief revenue agent. As violence escalated, Washington blamed the Democratic-Republican Societies for inciting defiance, and concluded that the federal government must assert its authority or surrender to another Regulator movement. In September 1794, he summoned state militia and personally led a 13,000-man army into western Pennsylvania. Resistance was already waning as alarmed Republican officeholders reminded constituents that the excise was a case of taxation *with* representation, so it must be obeyed until repealed. Military occupation demonstrated the government’s authority, and Washington pardoned the only two defendants convicted of treason. Still resenting organized opposition, Washington denounced “self-created societies” in his next message to Congress, an obvious thrust at the Democratic-Republican Societies. George Washington’s election as first president had been taken for granted by everyone. He reluctantly accepted a second term, but Citizen Genêt, the Democratic-Republican Societies, protests of Jay’s Treaty, and the Whiskey Rebellion had all tested his reliance on deference and consensus. As a Virginia planter, Washington might have sympathized with Madison and Jefferson, but he shared the Federalists’ love of order and increasingly distrusted Republicans as demagogic and irresponsible. As the end of his second term approached, Washington resolved to leave office and return to his beloved Mount Vernon. Before leaving, he tried once more to calm the partisan storm he left behind. Ghostwritten by Hamilton, Washington’s Farewell Address was not a speech but a newspaper essay, published in September 1796. In it, the Founding Father begged Americans to abandon “the baneful effects of the spirit of party,” warning that its disruptions could drive them to a despot for the sake of peace. Washington also worried that foreign attachments could lead patriots astray, so he advised Americans to trade with all nations but ally with none. “The great rule of conduct for us in regard to foreign nations,” he warned, “is in extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political connection as possible.” As he called for unity and neutrality, however, Washington clearly broke his own rules to favor a Federalist consensus at home and British friendship abroad. His advice proved impossible to follow, both in the 1790s and later, but his criticisms of parties and foreign alliances continued to resonate in American civic culture. --- # John Adams and Party Conflict In 1796, Federalists supported Vice President John Adams to succeed George Washington while Republicans endorsed Thomas Jefferson. The canvass was quiet, the candidates did not campaign actively, and legislatures chose most of the electors. Reflecting sectional divisions, Federalists won the Northeast while Republicans captured Pennsylvania and most of the slave states. The Constitution had not anticipated party divisions, however, and gave the presidency to the majority winner in the Electoral College and the vice presidency to the runner-up. This awkward arrangement made Adams the president and his bitter rival, Jefferson, the vice president. The government was divided, international conditions deteriorated, and party hostility intensified. Adams wanted to rise above party like Washington, but he lacked his predecessor’s stature, pleased almost nobody, and angered zealots on both sides. ### THE QUASI-WAR AND REPUBLICAN DISSENT Foreign affairs remained a flashpoint, for France answered Jay’s Treaty by seizing American ships. In 1797, Adams sent three special envoys to repair the damage, but France’s corrupt and cynical foreign minister, Charles-Maurice Talleyrand, evaded them. Three private messengers appeared instead, later called “X,” “Y,” and “Z,” and demanded large bribes before negotiating. The XYZ Affair excited a storm of protest when it became public, with congressmen and editors vowing war before dishonor. Just as Republicans had done over Jay’s Treaty, Federalists howled defiance at France and overrode Republicans to enlarge the army and create the Navy Department. French and American vessels fought what came to be called the Quasi-War for months, while Hamilton’s High Federalists railed against Adams’s prudent reluctance to seek a formal declaration of war. The president and the friends of peace eventually prevailed. Startled by Americans’ reactions, Talleyrand offered to negotiate fairly with new envoys, and they won an agreement that stopped the fighting in 1800 with no repayment for captured ships. The compromise avoided war, but the High Federalists never forgave Adams for bargaining with France. Political conflict worsened in 1798, as party leaders grew increasingly sure that their opponents would surrender America to one for- --- eign power or the other. Especially frightened by foreign radicals who brought French ideas to America, the Federalist Congress passed a series of Alien Acts that restricted access to American citizenship and allowed the expulsion of suspicious immigrants. In a further assault on free speech, Congress added the Sedition Act, which banned “any false, scandalous, and malicious writing or writings against the government of the United States, or the President of the United States, with intent to defame . . . or to bring them into contempt or disrepute.” Federalists clearly intended the Sedition Act to gag Republicans in the election of 1800, when Adams and Jefferson would oppose one another again, because it did not cover the vice president and expired on the eve of Inauguration Day 1801. Under its terms, authorities arrested 25 Republican editors and jailed 10 of them for criticizing the Adams administration. The Sedition Act plainly violated the First Amendment, but appeals to Federalist courts seemed useless. Jefferson responded instead with a set of protest resolutions for the legislature of Kentucky, and Madison sent others to Virginia. Retreating from Madison’s position in *The Federalist Papers*, the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions described the Union as a compact among sovereign states (not by the whole American people) and spelled out a states’ rights interpretation of the Constitution, which argued that the states alone (not the courts) could rule on violations of their compact. Arguing that the Alien and Sedition Acts did violate the Constitution, they claimed a right to nullify them, or to interpose state authority against them, but did not take any concrete actions or spell out what they meant. For decades thereafter, southern politicians swore by the “immortal principles of ’98” and used them to demand a federal government of strictly limited powers—first to oppose the Federalists and later to defend slavery. “THE REVOLUTION OF 1800” The election of 1800 thus capped a decade of escalating party conflict that seemed to pit every aspect of American public life against its opposite: Federalists against Republicans, Britain against France, North against South, deference against equality, financiers against yeomen, orthodoxy against dissent, broad construction against strict. Each side could point to actions by its opponents that undermined the Constitution: Federalists jailing editors, Republicans encouraging whiskey rebels. The controversies seemed desperately important be- --- cause their outcomes might determine the permanent character of the young republic, or even its ability to survive. George Washington had died in 1799, universally mourned but seemingly disconnected from the bitter polarization of public life. Under the circumstances, it is not surprising that Adams’s and Jefferson’s friendship broke down. Party nominating procedures did not exist yet. High Federalists opposed a second term for Adams, but a party consensus rallied around him. Republicans united behind Jefferson, and their congressmen met in a party caucus, or private meeting, to nominate Aaron Burr of New York for vice president. The campaign focused on electing state legislators who would promise to vote for electors of one party or the other. The campaign seethed with hostile rhetoric and political interest soared, especially in closely divided states. Just as the canvass closed, Adams and the government moved from the comforts of Philadelphia to the infant city of Washington, DC. Adams and his family occupied the unfinished executive mansion that later generations called the White House, still so raw that Abigail hung her laundry in the vast and drafty East Room. Congress met in the unfinished Capitol Building, down a muddy, rutted lane called Pennsylvania Avenue. Like-minded congressmen lived with each other in boardinghouse “messes” without their families. Foreign ambassadors deplored Washington’s primitive conditions, and it would be many years before the capital seemed habitable. Adams did not stay in Washington long, for Jefferson bested him, 73 electoral votes to 65. Most of Adams’s support came from New England, Jefferson took the South, and the middle were states divided. Voting starkly revealed the consequences of the Constitution’s three-fifths compromise, which inflated the power of slaveholding states in the House of Representatives and the Electoral College. The compromise gave Jefferson as many as 12 additional electoral votes, and made him the winner over Adams. The “democratic” candidate thus owed his election to slavery, leading Federalists to jeer him bitterly as the “Negro president.” The election also revealed a fundamental defect in the Constitution’s rules for choosing the president. Republican electors all wanted Jefferson as president and Burr as vice president, so all gave one of their two ballots to Jefferson and the other to Burr. The result was a tie in the Electoral College, which triggered a constitutional requirement that the House of Representatives choose a president from the highest vote-getters, with each state delegation casting a single vote. Hoping to block the hated Jefferson, Federalist congressmen voted for Burr --- and deadlocked Congress for 36 fruitless ballots. As tension mounted, Jefferson sent private assurances to Delaware’s Federalist congressman that he would not dismantle the party’s achievements if elected. Accepting this promise, Delaware and South Carolina abstained on the next ballot, allowing Jefferson to win and settling the election only two weeks before John Adams left office. In the aftermath, Congress approved and the states ratified the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution, requiring electors to cast separate ballots for president and vice president. A footnote to the election of 1800 led to Alexander Hamilton’s death. Burr sought rehabilitation by running for governor of New York in 1804. During the campaign, Hamilton dropped an insult and Burr replied with a challenge. Morally opposed to dueling but dreading taunts of cowardice, Hamilton fired in the air, but Burr shot straightest and the genius of Federalism fell mortally wounded. Hamilton’s death shocked northern public opinion, but southerners respected Burr’s defense of his honor and allowed him to return to the vice presidency. The duel left Burr in disgrace, however, and ruined his once-glowing prospects. Celebrating his victory, Thomas Jefferson ignored the role of the three-fifths clause and cheered “the revolution of 1800” as a triumph for majority rule. He even called it “as real a revolution in the principles of our government as that of 1776 was in its form.” In fact, Jefferson defeated Adams in the six states with popular voting for electors, and Republicans swamped Federalists in the accompanying congressional election, but ten states chose electors in their legislatures, so the majority’s true preferences remained unknown. The election did mark the first transfer of federal power from one party to another, however, and Republican rhetoric had championed the role of ordinary citizens. Federalists had resisted popular appeals and they never fully recovered. After 1800, Federalists still dominated New England and other commercial centers, but Republicans contested them everywhere. Federalists would benefit when Republicans blundered, but they never controlled the country again or elected another president. If not a fundamental revolution, the election of 1800 was certainly a significant turning point. # The Jeffersonians in Power Despite the venom of “the revolution of 1800,” Thomas Jefferson did not unleash a reign of terror or a social revolution, but allowed the --- least popular Federalist measures to die quietly. On the whole, however, American political culture grew increasingly responsive to the wishes and values of ordinary white men. Though judges still defended a Federalist vision of public life, Jefferson and his supporters found that minimal government could bring a sense of freedom and opportunity for men like William Thompson without attacking the privileges of the John Rutledges. "WE ARE ALL REPUBLICANS, WE ARE ALL FEDERALISTS" The president began with a famous appeal for conciliation. "Though the will of the majority is in all cases to prevail," he declared in his inaugural address, "the minority possess their equal rights, which equal law must protect." Affirming the rivals’ shared values, he assured his listeners that "we are all Republicans, we are all Federalists." He did not mean to deny party differences but only that virtually all citizens preferred a federated republic over disunion or monarchy. Dissenters could "stand undisturbed as monuments to the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it." Privately, Jefferson still called Federalist leaders "monocrats" and "Anglomen," but he hoped that gentle persuasion would wean away their followers and restore political harmony. Jefferson avoided radical shifts in government policy. The Sedition Act expired and Congress relaxed the Alien Acts’ requirements for naturalization. Republicans sold the government’s stock in the Bank of the United States but kept it alive until its charter expired in 1811. Jefferson reassured Federalists that he would shun "entangling alliances" with foreign powers and preserve the Constitution, but would not use the government to remodel society. Unlike Hamilton, Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin began to pay off the national debt instead of using it for development capital. Congress also cut the Federalists’ expensive military establishment and their hated excise taxes. Finally, Jefferson abandoned the government rituals cultivated by Washington and Adams. He walked from his boardinghouse to the inauguration and rode a horse around Washington instead of a coach. Receiving the British minister in slippers and a dressing gown, the president cultivated an air of public simplicity without surrendering the comforts of Monticello. Jefferson forecast his policy changes with a passage in his inaugu- --- ral address that painted an idyllic vision of personal liberty and limited government. All the country needed, he said, was “a wise and frugal government, which shall restrain men from injuring one another, shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned. This is the sum of good government, and this is necessary to close the circle of our felicities.” Future generations would fiercely debate the adequacy of this formula, and its application to nonwhite men and all women. ### A CHANGING POLITICAL COMMUNITY In 1776, Virginia’s Declaration of Rights had proclaimed “that all men are by nature equally free and independent,” but restricted the ballot to white men who owned 25 acres of improved land or 100 acres unimproved. Thomas Jefferson had opposed such limitations and thought they disenfranchised at least half of Virginia’s adult white men, but most early states used similar restrictions. Defenders argued that landownership demonstrated “permanent attachment to the community” or reasoned that property requirements actually curbed the power of the wealthy by preventing them from wielding the votes of their laborers and tenants. Following the Revolution, new states filled with citizens whose land purchases were incomplete or legally contested but whose tax payments and militia service, or even their willingness to stay put for a year, seemed to prove as much community attachment as a perfect land title. Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee all dropped property requirements for voting when they joined the Union in the 1790s, and so did most states that followed them. Despite conservative opposition, the movement for a broader franchise then spread eastward. Political calculations usually drove reform, as office seekers angled for the votes of the newly enfranchised. By the 1820s, most states allowed white men to vote with little more than a tax-paying or residency requirement, and restrictions on office holding fell also. Colonial gentlemen had assumed that most voters would defer to men of wealth, education, and social distinction. They were shocked when new voters cast ballots as they pleased. “You are a fool, young man,” stormed New York Federalist Judge William Cooper to one sturdy freeman in 1792. “You cannot know how to vote as well as I can direct you, for I am in public office.” Republican organizers like Con- --- necticut’s Abraham Bishop capitalized on such bluster, denouncing “the great, the wise, rich and mighty men of the world” as “agents of delusion,” and he raked in votes with appeals to “the laboring and subordinate people throughout the world” whose “toil goes to support the splendour, luxury and vices of the deluders.” Bishop’s rhetoric horrified conservatives, but forced them to choose between white male equality and risking those treasured offices. African Americans also used the language of republicanism to claim equal rights. As the northern states gradually ended slavery, a free black population gathered in cities like Boston, Philadelphia, and New York, and some met property requirements for voting. Mindful of the parties’ racial differences, most free blacks voted Federalist whenever they could. Even when they could not vote, urban blacks expressed their political values with marches and banquets to celebrate the Fourth of July, the abolition of the slave trade, and their own presence in the community. In reply, northern racists used bogus dialect to ridicule the “bobalition” of slavery, and continued the discrimination that burdened free blacks like Venture Smith. White women also asserted their civic membership by joining Fourth of July celebrations, either alone or with men, and stressing the importance of republican motherhood, but could not vote outside of New Jersey. ### THE POWER OF THE COURTS Republicans won the legislative and executive branches of the federal government when Jefferson took office, but Adams’s Federalist appointees kept the judiciary. His most notable choice was Chief Justice John Marshall. The Virginian kept his seat for 34 years and his decisions continued molding a strong federal government long after Federalists had lost power everywhere else. Republicans charged that Adams had stayed up until midnight on his last day in office, unfairly naming Federalists to vacant judgeships. Efforts to unseat these “midnight judges” brought a very important case to Marshall’s Supreme Court. Federalist William Marbury received a midnight appointment as justice of the peace for the District of Columbia but did not get his commission before Adams’s term expired. Jefferson instructed Secretary of State James Madison to withhold the commission so he could appoint a Republican instead, but Marbury demanded a mandamus, or court order requiring its delivery. In accordance with a minor provision of the Judiciary Act of 1789, the --- case of *Marbury v. Madison* went directly to the Supreme Court. Less farsighted judges than John Marshall might have sided with Marbury to slip a fellow partisan into office. The chief justice saw a bigger opportunity, however, and used the case to assert the power of the judiciary and attack the premise of the recent Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions that the states had final authority to interpret the Constitution. Marshall delivered the court’s unanimous decision in 1803. In simple terms, he agreed that Marbury deserved his commission, but decided he had come to the wrong court. More specifically, Marshall ruled that the Constitution did not give Congress explicit authority to send mandamus disputes to the Supreme Court, so that section of the Judiciary Act was unconstitutional, and Marbury must try his luck in a lower court. This was the first time that the Supreme Court used the power of judicial review to invalidate an act of Congress. The Constitution did not mention this power, but Marshall used strict constructionist logic to claim it, by insisting that the Congress could not exercise a power that the Constitution did not grant. He also insisted that the courts alone could settle the Constitution’s meaning, for “it is emphatically the province and duty of the Judicial Department to say what the law is.” Marshall’s decision made the doctrine of judicial review an explicit and crucial component of US government, and a crucial check on Congress by the judiciary. Subordinating the people’s representatives to unelected judges, *Marbury v. Madison* used Republican means to enshrine Federalist principles. Marshall shrewdly made his point in a minor case that blocked a Federalist appointment, overturned a Federalist statute, and limited the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction (over mandamuses), all on the basis of strict construction. The unfortunate Marbury lost his position, but his failed lawsuit affirmed the higher Federalist principle of judicial supremacy. Marshall’s subsequent decisions would assert the court’s power to void state laws, state judicial rulings, and even state constitutions, erecting the Supreme Court as the final arbiter of American constitutional authority. ### HAITI AND LOUISIANA When Jefferson became president, the United States stopped at the Mississippi River. Beyond was Louisiana, founded by France and awarded to Spain at the end of the Seven Years’ War. Its vast boundaries nominally stretched to the Rocky Mountains, but Europeans --- occupied little more than some riverbank trading posts and the country around New Orleans. Pinckney’s Treaty had opened the Mississippi in 1795, but river navigation and access to the Gulf remained key concerns of American foreign policy. The acquisition of Louisiana became the central incident of Jefferson’s first term, and linked foreign affairs and slavery to western expansion. It also clearly illustrated Republican and Federalist differences on crucial matters of public policy, beginning when the French Revolution reached the sugar colony of Saint Domingue, later known as Haiti. When Haiti’s free people of color heard the egalitarian principles of the French Revolution, they demanded inclusion in its promises of liberty and equality. Their revolt soon spread to the slaves, and fleeing whites reported extreme violence as they sought refuge all over the United States and the Caribbean basin. Responding to pressure and its own principles, the revolutionary French government abolished slavery in 1794, and Toussaint Louverture, a supremely talented former slave, emerged as the leader of the black forces who battled for liberty against assorted rivals, including whites, free people of color, and British