1787, John Rutledge joined with gentlemen from other states to write the --- US Constitution, hoping that a new national government would provide even firmer lessons about the proper place of tavern politicians in a federal republic. From the perspective of William Thompson, of course, America’s future was in even more danger from the arrogance and presumption of those who still called themselves “the better sort.” What did republican liberty mean if a patriotic citizen could be jailed for rebuking a public official? How could the people control their republic if the gentry stayed on top? When the new constitution was submitted for ratification by the states, many men like William Thompson would call for its defeat. And what of the unnamed messenger, now forgotten in the midst of public controversy? William Thompson had asserted his liberty by claiming the right to bully a slave woman. How many other white men would define equality as their common right to abuse everyone else? What would happen to the legacy of independence if privileges based on race and gender replaced those of wealth and social class? By 1783, the War for Independence was over, but in the largest sense, the ongoing struggle over these and similar questions prolonged the American Revolution for at least the rest of the 1780s and possibly longer. The questions were not easy, and the early republic’s answers would not endure, but wrestling with these issues absorbed the energies of the next generation and decisively affected the legacy of the American Revolution. ## Revolution and American Society Victorious Americans greeted the coming of peace with loud public rejoicing. Speeches, parades, sermons, and hymns of thanksgiving pealed forth in celebration of independence. “How wonderful, how gracious, how glorious has been the good hand of our God upon us,” exulted the Reverend Ezra Stiles, preaching to the Connecticut state legislature, “in carrying us through so tremendous a warfare!” With much less solemnity, the citizens and gentlemen of New Bern, North Carolina, joined together in an uproarious victory celebration, in which everybody drank together and feasted on barbecued pork. “It is impossible to conceive without seeing it a more democratic assemblage,” a foreign visitor marveled, “and one which fulfills to a greater extent what the poets and historians of ancient Greece tell us of similar events among those free people.” Between the prayers and the toasts, --- a rough-edged poet captured a widely shared feeling that radiated the joy and optimism felt by thousands of Americans: > With drums and trumpets sounding > Liberty and joy abounding . . . , > The road’s made plain, march on, march on, > Huzza for peace and Washington. Despite the joy and optimism brought on by the peace treaty, the road to the future was not quite as plain as the poet suggested. Perhaps the solemn warnings of ministers best captured the note of anxiety beneath the rejoicing. Drawing on the legacy of Puritanism, many preachers compared America to Israel, the favored nation of the Old Testament, only to remind their congregations of the special burdens imposed when republican principles were joined to a national covenant. “We cannot be a happy, unless we are a virtuous people,” the Reverend Samuel McClintock warned the legislature of New Hampshire. “As virtue is the basis of republics, their existence depends upon it, and the moment that the people in general lose their virtue, and become venal and corrupt, they cease to be free.” The struggle to define national virtue in the face of widespread social and economic diversity, and to devise social and political structures to maintain it, would become the foremost American task in the generation following independence. ### GENTLE AND SIMPLE The Revolution had unleashed far-reaching changes that undermined the existing rules for an orderly and well-organized society. The revolutionaries did not slaughter or expel a hated upper class, as the French, Russian, and Chinese Revolutions would later do, but the “revolution from below” had led to many incidents like the clash between William Thompson and John Rutledge. Americans struggled with new meanings for liberty and equality in state after state. Writing his autobiography in 1794, at the age of 61, the Reverend Devereux Jarratt of Virginia described the social impact of the Revolution in a few vivid sentences. The son of a carpenter, Jarratt recalled that “we were accustomed to look upon, what were called *gentle* folks, as beings of a superior order. For my part, I was quite shy of *them,* and kept off at a humble distance. A *periwig,* in those days, was a distin- --- guishing badge of *gentle folk*—and when I saw a man riding the road, near our house, with a wig on, it would so alarm my fears, and give me such a disagreeable feeling, that I dare say, I would run off, as if for my life. Such ideas of the difference between *gentle* and *simple*, were, I believe, universal among all of my rank and age.” Officially, at least, the Revolution had changed such customs. According to the Declaration of Independence, all white men were equal citizens, and freeborn carpenters could teach their children that a head of false hair was nothing to be afraid of. The aging Jarratt was not sure this was such a good thing, however. “In our high *republican times,*” he lamented, “there is more leveling than ought to be, consistent with good government.” By 1794, when Jarratt wrote, most “gentle folk” who agreed with him were careful to conceal their opinions, particularly if they were men who aspired to public office. Except in a few places like Charleston, ordinary white men would no longer submit to the worst pretensions of self-styled gentlemen. Louis Otto, the French ambassador to the United States, captured the reality of most communities in 1786, when he informed his government that “although there are no nobles in America, there is a class of men denominated ‘gentlemen,’ who by reason of their wealth, their talents, their education, their families, or the offices they hold, aspire to a preeminence which the people refuse to grant them.” Distinctions of wealth and talent continued to exist in America, but republican leaders increasingly attributed their success to hard work and personal merit instead of birth and good breeding. Officers of the Continental Army outraged public opinion when they tried to create the Society of the Cincinnati as a hereditary association for themselves and their first-born sons. Samuel Adams called it “as rapid a Stride towards an hereditary Military Nobility as was ever made in so short a time,” and George Washington was forced to disavow the effort. Instead, republican intellectuals like Thomas Jefferson insisted on the fundamental equality of men, and thoughtful yeomen and artisans like William Manning of Billerica, Massachusetts, denounced the “Difference of Interest Between those that Labour for a Living and those that git a Living without Bodily Labour.” Social class distinctions would hardly vanish in post-Revolutionary America, but the shape of those distinctions would change significantly. Economic, political, and cultural leadership would diverge, so the wealthiest and best-educated men in a community would not always be its highest officeholders. --- Accommodating the privileges of some with the supposed equality of many would become a major challenge for the new society. ### BLACK AND FREE White men were not the only ones affected by the promise of equality. Out of three million Americans counted by the first federal census in 1790, three‑quarters of a million were black, and 60,000 were free. Most were creoles, that is, American‑born. By contrast, Latin American and Caribbean slaves were more likely to be African, because they suffered higher death rates and masters regularly replaced them with new captives. Free blacks and creoles were likelier than new arrivals to have learned the language, skills, and customs of the surrounding white population. The painful contradiction between American liberty and African bondage inspired a post‑Revolutionary antislavery movement. Except for Georgia and South Carolina, the states slapped prohibitive taxes on the Atlantic slave trade. Vermont outlawed slavery altogether in its 1777 constitution. Massachusetts followed in 1781, when Quok Walker and Elizabeth Freeman sued for freedom on the grounds that the recently adopted state constitution had declared that “all men are born free and equal.” Both won their cases in the lower courts, and Chief Justice William Cushing endorsed their argument two years later. New Hampshire judges agreed, and slavery began to crumble in both states. In 1780, Pennsylvania adopted a law that gave freedom to all slaves born after its passage when they reached the age of 28. Connecticut and Rhode Island took similar measures, followed by New York in 1799 and New Jersey in 1804. These statutes freed no living slaves, but only promised freedom to their unborn children. The end of slavery did not bring racial equality to the northern states, however, for law and custom continued to bar African Americans from voting, holding office, serving on juries, joining the militia, or worshiping equally in churches. Even in the South, where slavery was deeply embedded in society and culture, freedom became more available. During the war, thousands of slaves had liberated themselves by escaping to British lines or other places where they passed for free. Chesapeake planters softened their stand on slavery when they shifted from tobacco to wheat, a crop that needed less labor. Virginia changed its laws to permit manumission, or the voluntary release of slaves, in 1782, and by 1790, all --- the southern states but South Carolina had followed suit. In his will, George Washington offered freedom to his own human chattels upon the death of his wife, Martha. When George died, Martha regained the slaves she had owned when she married him, and these she kept in bondage. Other masters emancipated their favorite individuals, some of whom they had fathered, or allowed slaves to purchase their freedom. Fed by northern abolition laws, self-purchases, manumissions, and escapes, America’s free black community more than tripled in size, from 60,000 in 1790 to 186,000 in 1810. Despite countless forms of discrimination, freedom opened new doors to this small but significant African American community. Restrictive laws and white prejudices barred them from schools, jobs, and equal citizenship, but many still forged ahead. Paul Cuffee of Massachusetts excelled as a sea captain, a prosperous community leader, and a pioneer in establishing African American settlement in Africa itself. After enslavement in Virginia, Philadelphia, and the Caribbean, Olaudah Equiano (or Gustavus Vassa, as he was also known) purchased his freedom, became a British antislavery activist, and published his autobiography, *The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the African*. Benjamin Banneker, a Maryland land surveyor, published an almanac based on his own astronomical calculations, and used it to rebuke Thomas Jefferson’s suggestions that Africans were inherently inferior to whites. Jefferson did not retract his libels, but he made an exception for Banneker by allowing him to participate in surveying the District of Columbia. Free blacks poured energy and resources into new institutions for their own communities. In Philadelphia, Methodist convert Richard Allen established the Free African Society, a combined church and mutual aid association. Ordained by Methodist evangelist Francis Asbury, Allen later founded Philadelphia’s Bethel African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church and served as first bishop of the new AME denomination. A comparable movement in New York saw the formation of an AME Zion congregation in 1796, followed by a distinct AME Zion denomination. The first black Baptist church appeared in Savannah in 1779, followed by congregations in Virginia, Philadelphia, Boston, and New York. Initiated by Freemasons in the British Army, Prince Hall of Boston launched a black Masonic movement that became the African Grand Lodge of North America in 1791. A parallel movement led to the creation of private schools for black children and mutual aid societies for black workers, though educators often met stiff opposi- --- tion in southern settings. By their hard-won success, these community institutions nourished a free black community that was hard-pressed by continued white hostility. In the years ahead, they would also offer space to support more dramatic efforts to liberate those who were still in bondage, from abolition campaigns to outright slave rebellions. ## "REMEMBER THE LADIES" Female supporters of American independence also used the post-Revolutionary generation to claim a new position in American society. During the years leading up to the war, women and men protested obnoxious taxes both publicly and privately, sometimes together and sometimes separately. Women of all ages and conditions increased their spinning and weaving in response to the boycott movement, and elite women raised funds and renounced luxuries that profited British merchants and supposedly sapped revolutionary virtue. Some followed the army in wartime, working as cooks, laundresses, or prostitutes. Rich and poor, those who stayed at home took on new tasks and responsibilities in the absence of men. Like many revolutions, the American Revolution disturbed traditional thinking about the relations of men and women. One of the most vivid examples occurred in an exchange of letters between John Adams and his brilliant and spirited wife, Abigail. When John was in the Second Continental Congress, campaigning for American independence, Abigail wrote from their home in Braintree, Massachusetts. "In the new Code of Laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make," she remarked, "I desire you would remember the Ladies." Echoing the phrases male revolutionaries used about the British Crown, Abigail urged her husband "not [to] put such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands. Remember all Men would be tyrants if they could." Adopting a playful tone that softened the gravity of the subject, she warned that "if perticular care and attention is not paid to the Laidies we are determined to foment a Rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we have no voice, or Representation." John and Abigail Adams shared a loving and respectful relationship, but Abigail’s remarks cut too close for her husband’s comfort. John protected his dignity by expanding on his wife’s jesting tone. "As to your extraordinary Code of Laws," he replied, "I cannot but laugh." The revolutionaries had been accused of stirring up all kinds of social inferiors, from children to college students to Indians to Negroes— --- and now women! "Depend upon it," he promised, "We know better than to repeal our Masculine systems," because "you know they are little more than Theory." In reality, he said, men's legal power over women was no match for women's emotional power over men; so men's loss of nominal authority "would completely subject us to the Despotism of the Peticoat." For the most part, discussions of new political relationships between men and women went no further than John and Abigail Adams's edgy private banter. An exception came in New Jersey, whose early constitution conferred the ballot on "all free inhabitants" who met certain property requirements. Though wives could not own property, land-owning widows used this provision to claim the right to vote in the 1780s and continued to cast ballots until male legislators revoked the privilege in 1807. Women who could not vote could still claim the role of republican motherhood. If the republic depended on civic virtue, women played a crucial public function by inculcating virtue in their sons and husbands. The republican mother should put aside flirtation, fashion, and gossip in favor of the moral and intellectual uplift of her children. She could not change her legal or political rights, but she could claim more public honor and respect than her colonial grandmother. More tangibly, she could claim the right to an education for herself so she could do the job of child-rearing properly. As educational reformer Benjamin Rush put it in 1787, "Our ladies should be qualified to ascertain degree, by a peculiar and suitable education, to concur in instructing their sons in the principles of liberty and government." Inspired by this ideal, post-Revolutionary Americans founded as many as 196 new women's seminaries and academies between 1790 and 1830. Increasingly, these schools offered the same curricula as the best male colleges. Though barred from government, female graduates sought to influence public opinion by joining reading circles, literary societies, and reform organizations, and by writing for publication. In the 1790s, newspaper essayist Judith Sargent Murray insisted that educated women must know how to earn their own livings if necessary, and they must have the psychological strength to make their way in the world without the constant protection of a man. In Murray's view, the ideal woman *"should reverence herself."* More active agitation for gender equality would come in future generations, but the Revolutionary experience had left a mark on gender relations that would not disappear. --- # INDIANS AND FREEDOM The Revolution dealt a harsh blow to eastern Native Americans. When European empires claimed the continent, tribes between the Appalachians and the Mississippi skillfully played the English, French, and Spanish against one another to defend their own independence, while still trading furs and deerskins for European products. Though France departed in 1763, Great Britain drew its Proclamation Line to protect trans-Appalachian Indians from American encroachment, and most of these tribes took Britain’s side in the Revolution. The Americans never fully occupied their territory during the war, and Indians felt betrayed when the British surrendered it at war’s end. The diverse tribes of the Ohio Valley were largely united in their determination to keep their homes. Early inhabitants had been Shawnees, Miamis, Wyandots, and numerous smaller tribes, but retreating bands of Delawares and others had joined them from the East. The region’s villages often contained multiple ethnic groups who were already changing their traditions to protect themselves from white domination. As refugees from the East, they had no desire to move again, and many had previously embraced the spiritual revival and pan-Indian vision preached by Neolin and Pontiac following the Seven Years’ War. They would respond once again to calls for unified resistance when American ambitions collided with their own territorial claims. East of the Ohio country, the Revolution fractured the once-powerful Iroquois confederacy of western New York. Chief Thayendanegea, also known as Joseph Brant, led the Iroquois in battles against the Americans, and brought them safely to British Canada when peace arrived. Soon afterward, Brant organized a multitribal alliance to keep Americans south of the Ohio. Britain initially encouraged the Northwest Indian Confederacy by supplying weapons and refusing to evacuate its forts in the Ohio country, until the cycle of skirmishes and revenge killings between Ohio Indians and white intruders from Kentucky finally broke into open warfare. On Brant’s advice, the Iroquois did not participate in the ensuing war, but withdrew to small reservations in New York and Ontario. Joseph Brant’s southern counterpart was Alexander McGillivray, the son of a Creek mother and a Scottish trader who had received a British education in Charleston but fully embraced his Creek identity. Alternately courting the rival empires of Spain and the United --- States, McGillivray won support from both while strengthening the Creek confederacy against local chiefs who were tempted to sell their lands piecemeal. Avoiding the fate of the Ohio Indians, McGillivray’s maneuvers protected his people’s independence for another generation, though internal disputes about relations with surrounding empires would ultimately undermine their solidarity. Skillful diplomacy by Brant, McGillivray, Dragging Canoe, and their compatriots forced the United States to abandon its plans to seize the lands of Indians unilaterally. Instead, the federal government acknowledged the tribes as sovereign nations, and promised that future land transfers would occur through treaties that were at least nominally voluntary. Though frequently violated in practice, these concessions would form the legal basis for future claims of Indian sovereignty. ## Devising Republican Government When royal government crumbled, the revolutionaries faced the immediate task of creating alternate institutions for their individual states, and the Continental Congress had already urged them to begin the process six weeks before the formal adoption of the Declaration of Independence. Connecticut and Rhode Island had been virtually self-governing before the war, and they continued under their earlier plans of government for some time afterward, but the former royal and proprietary colonies began to reorganize themselves in the midst of revolution. The process required the revolutionaries to devise new institutions for self-government and to rethink the relations between members of the same community. White men posed the first challenge, for they now expected some form of public equality to replace the older hierarchy of “gentle” and “simple,” or the “better,” “middling,” and “lower” sorts. More particularly, Americans divided over the practical meaning of “virtue.” They knew in the abstract that republican virtue was a dedication to the common good over personal advantage. When there was no agreement on the common good, however, whose advantage should come first? Could a simple majority define the common good in every case? Was it possible for the majority to err? If so, what protections should exist for the minority, especially the minority who called themselves the “better sort” and controlled the most wealth? The practical meaning of “virtue” had crucial but hidden implications for the nature of equality and class privilege in the new America. --- # STATE CONSTITUTIONS AND GOVERNMENTS Disgusted with monarchy, politically active Americans agreed that their new states must be republics, with written constitutions to limit their governments’ lawful powers. Written in the summer of 1776, Virginia’s constitution came first, and its structure became typical. It provided for a bicameral general assembly, elected annually and responsible for choosing state officers, including a largely powerless governor. The Virginia Declaration of Rights promised “that all men are by nature equally free and independent,” but only “when they enter into a state of society,” a provision intended to exclude the state’s nearly 300,000 slaves. Other clauses protected