public estimation.” In the larger cities, masters and journeymen had long joined together to celebrate artisans’ role in a republican state and society. After the Panic of 1819, some went further and formed all-journeyman societies to resist any pay cuts or extensions of the working day. In 1827, the Philadelphia Mechanics Union of Trade Associations brought several of these early labor unions together to protest an announced lengthening of the workday from ten hours to eleven, with no increase in wages. They further resolved “to raise the mechanical and productive classes to the condition of true independence and equality” and establish “a just balance of power, both mental, moral, political, and scientific, between all the various classes and individuals which constitute society.” The following year, they organized the Workingmen’s Party, the first explicitly labor-oriented political party in the world. The “Workies” spread to other northeastern cities and elected officials from New York to Northampton, Massachusetts, before slowly declining. Some local groups split between radicals and moderates, and others decided that confronting employers directly would help more than winning elections. The early Workingmen had spurned both major parties, but Democrats quickly lured them with their own class-conscious rhetoric. Inside the New York Democratic Party, for example, the most far-reaching opposition to banks and corporations came from the “Loco-Focos,” a faction of former Workingmen known for their use of newly invented “loco-foco” matches to illuminate a meeting when their opponents turned off the gaslights. With this exception, the Workingmen’s movement of the 1830s died when a new recession struck in 1837, deflecting workers’ energies from political action to the struggle for simple survival. ### WRESTLING WITH SLAVERY The Anti-Masons and the Workingmen each attempted to escape the two-party straitjacket, but the Whigs and the Democrats absorbed them both. Mainstream parties had more trouble with the strongest --- attackers and defenders of slavery. Party leaders longed to silence the slavery dispute, but dissidents wanted just as much to rouse it. The American Anti-Slavery Society spread rapidly after Jackson’s reelection, growing from 225 local affiliates in 1835 to 1,346 in 1838, and 1,650 in 1840, with a total membership of 130,000–170,000. Copying evangelical techniques, it first attempted to convince individual slaveholders by “moral suasion,” but white southerners proclaimed that death awaited any abolitionist who preached in a slave state, and posted large rewards for the capture of leaders like Garrison and the Tappan brothers. Changing tactics in the summer of 1835, the society mailed bundles of abolitionist literature to leading slaveholders throughout the South, with gory illustrations seemingly designed to inflame illiterate bondsmen. When these materials reached Charleston, city officials led a mob to the post office and burned the offending pamphlets in the street, immediately challenging the Jackson administration. Jacksonian officials had no sympathy for abolitionism, but the law required them to protect and deliver the mail. Should there be an exception for antislavery literature? Without success, slavery’s defenders demanded that the free states ban “incendiary” speech and writing just as the slave states did. Congress refused to bar antislavery literature from the mails, but Jackson and his postmaster general got the same result by forbidding delivery of any materials thought dangerous in a given community. Proving the white South’s considerable power to silence criticism, abolitionists lacked free use of the mails until the Civil War. Denied entry to slaveholders’ homes, abolitionists turned to Congress. Virtually everyone agreed that Congress lacked power over slavery in the states, but the Constitution gave it the power of “exclusive Legislation” for the District of Columbia. Slavery had remained legal in the district since its formation from parts of Maryland and Virginia. Since then, traders had made Washington a major center for the sale of slaves from the Chesapeake to the Deep South, horrifying visitors with jails and auction houses in sight of the Capitol itself. Simply attacking this traffic would give the abolitionists a major opportunity to publicize their case, and success would hand them a major victory. In the winter of 1835–1836, they flooded Congress with at least 176 petitions with almost 34,000 signatures, including those of some 15,000 women, all respectfully calling for the abolition of slavery and the slave trade in the nation’s capital. --- In the past, Congress had buried such petitions in committee. By 1835, however, the spread of abolitionism, the mixed success of nullification, and, above all, the desire to force other southerners to choose section over party drove proslavery zealots to demand stronger action. In 1835, freshman South Carolina representative James Henry Hammond won instant notoriety when he moved for a routine antislavery petition to "be not received." He claimed that abolition in the capital would be unconstitutional, so no one had the right to ask for it. Instead of legitimizing abolitionists, Hammond's so-called gag rule would require Congress to ignore all their petitions. John C. Calhoun echoed Hammond's demands in the Senate, and Congress fell into a major debate over the right of petition and the legitimacy of antislavery speech. In the course of this debate, the South Carolinians sharpened the defense of their Peculiar Institution. Rejecting Jefferson's lament that slavery was a necessary evil, Calhoun praised it as a "positive good." Hammond hailed slavery for producing "the highest toned, the purest, best organization of society that has existed on the face of the earth." Both insisted that enslavement had brought Christianity and civilization to savages, uplifted blacks as far as they could go, and turned white men into racial equals, regardless of their economic status. According to its defenders, however, this perfect society was so fragile that it could not withstand public controversy. Contented slaves would turn violent if they heard that Congress debated their status, and honorable southern congressmen could not endure the insults of deranged fanatics. Northern congressmen who could listen to antislavery petitions must hate the South, Carolinians charged, and moderate southerners were traitors to their section. These accusations had their intended effect and locked Congress in a monumental battle over the gag rule. On the other side of the argument, former president John Quincy Adams heroically defended the right of petition. The sixth president was now a mere congressman from Massachusetts, and though he professed to disagree with the petitioners, he insisted on their right to be heard. The stalemate finally ended when South Carolina's Henry Pinckney broke ranks and suggested a slightly milder gag rule that dismissed all petitions about slavery as "inexpedient," not unconstitutional. This change made no practical difference, but northern Democrats liked it better and it gave a potential opening to abolitionists if circumstances changed. Calhounites therefore hated it and denounced Pinckney's "treachery," but most southern Democrats believed that --- party unity with northern Democrats provided slavery’s best defense and their own best chances for higher office. Pinckney’s gag rule swept the House because the approaching presidential election of 1836 pushed northern and southern Democrats to find common ground. Congressman John Quincy Adams continued to struggle against the gag rule almost single-handedly, but it would be nine years before this monument to the power of partisan compromise over pro- and antislavery principles would finally collapse. John C. Calhoun likewise kept fighting to tear southern politicians out of both parties and unite them in a proslavery bloc to defend sectional interests, but outside South Carolina itself, he did not succeed in his lifetime. As their builders had hoped, the allure of the national parties usually prevailed over sectional loyalty. * Americans had greeted the end of the War of 1812 with jubilant celebration and proud assertions of national greatness. Congress felt especially assertive and approved a number of measures that Republicans had once spurned as unconstitutional, especially a national bank and a protective tariff, while nearly adopting a national policy on internal improvements. All three policies became hotly controversial, however, when the Panic of 1819 revealed the most destructive side of the Market Revolution. At the same time, the Missouri crisis revealed the explosive power of the slavery question, especially its tendency to stir violent disputes that might consume the republic in its infancy. In the presidential election of 1824, Andrew Jackson led his rivals, but the eventual victory of John Quincy Adams brought charges of corruption and linked government support for economic development to undemocratic political practices. Lauding “the will of the people” over his enemies’ “corrupt bargain,” Jackson swept to victory in 1828. Jackson and his supporters turned their electoral coalition into a permanent political party by reaching out to ordinary voters with parades, rallies, and entertaining speeches, and by disciplining activists through patronage, nominating conventions, and newspaper coverage. In reaction to Jackson’s Bank War, opposing Whigs created their own party to resist the Democrats, and a Second American Party System emerged to debate the issues aroused by the Market Revolution. The two parties likewise widened access to politics beyond the ranks of eighteenth-century-style elites, and guaranteed that no one could --- inherit political leadership by default, but must earn it through the noisy, messy rituals of mass democracy. Critics assailed this system for its own elitism and for limiting the range of political debate, but party leaders hoped it could widen a controlled democracy while dampening the slavery dispute. The Jacksonian political system was still unfinished when Old Hickory left office. Both major parties had unstable features, and firmer structures would only emerge under Jackson’s successor, Martin Van Buren. But Jackson had laid the basis for the two-party arrangement of American public life that governed the republic until the eve of Civil War and remained as a general pattern ever afterward. The issues that had brought angry villagers to blows in places like Fayetteville, North Carolina, a decade earlier reached across the nation and become manageable, even routine. Party songs and banners did not reverse the Market Revolution, but gave many Americans a reassuring sense of control in this wrenching period of transition. Future generations would find that these creations of the contemporaries of Andrew Jackson had become indispensable aspects of their public life. The Second Party System did collapse eventually. Over the next two decades, Americans would find that the slavery issue would not disappear as easily as the question of a national bank, and the policy of geographical expansion would drive that controversy beyond the power of Whigs and Democrats to control. They began that discovery in the 1840s, when they carried their quarrels across the Mississippi to the unknown territory of the Great West. --- MAP 5. From the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 to the Mexican Cession of 1848, the United States stretched its boundaries from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean, opening new lands for white settlement and plantation slavery, and sparking major disputes over slavery in the new territories. Map by Gabriel Moss. <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">BRITISH NORTH AMERICA</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td colspan="2">Ceded by U.S., 1818</td> <td colspan="3" rowspan="2">Ceded by Great Britain, 1842<br>~~(Webster-Ashburton Treaty)~~</td> <td colspan="2" rowspan="3">Ceded by Spain, 1819</td> </tr> <tr> <td>8</td> <td>-</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="2">Oregon Country, 1846</td> <td colspan="3">Annexation, 1845 TX</td> </tr> <tr> <td>WA</td> <td>MT</td> <td>SD</td> <td>OR</td> <td>WY</td> <td>NE</td> <td>CA NV UT</td> </tr> <tr> <td>KS</td> <td colspan="6">Missouri Compromise Line</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="7">Louisiana Purchase 1803</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="7">Atlantic Ocean</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="7">Pacific Ocean</td> </tr> <tr> <td colspan="7">Gulf of Mexico</td> </tr> </tbody> </table> - The map shows modern state boundaries. - The United States expanded from the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 to the Mexican Cession in 1848. - The boundaries stretched from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean. - This expansion opened new lands for white settlement and plantation slavery. - It sparked major disputes over slavery in the new territories. --- # CHAPTER 12 # Wars for the West, 1836–1850 Once a novelty, the political party nominating convention had become a routine feature of American public life by the 1840s. Baltimore’s central location made it a favorite spot for these regular gatherings, and May of 1844 brought three separate national conventions to the city, along with the state convention of the Maryland Democratic Party. The Whigs came first and nominated for president their beloved “Prince Hal,” Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky, now 67 years old and seeking the office for the third time. A second gathering endorsed the wan ambitions of “His Accidency,” John Tyler of Virginia, who had risen from the vice presidency to the presidency upon the death of William Henry Harrison but spoiled his chances for an elected term by quarreling with all comers. The most significant assembly convened in Odd Fellows Hall on May 27 to choose a presidential candidate for the Democratic Party. The leading contender was former president Martin Van Buren. The New Yorker was a faithful Jacksonian, a key founder of the Second Party System, and a master of the compromises and patronage agreements that held it together. General William Henry Harrison had ruined Van Buren’s hopes for reelection in 1840, but “Little Van” returned in 1844, ready for a second campaign based on the old Jacksonian slogans that denounced special privileges and the banking system. But Martin Van Buren was also vulnerable, and a handful of rivals ardently hoped he would stumble. Many Americans remembered Van Buren’s earlier presidential term for the Panic of 1837 and the hard times that followed it. As the depression slowly lifted, party professionals did not look forward to defending the former president’s economic record and few longed to refight old battles that now seemed settled. More voters were attracted instead by western expansion, --- especially the opportunity to annex the breakaway Mexican province of Texas. Mostly populated by Americans and their slaves, Texas had declared independence in 1836 and sought to join the United States, but Mexico had never accepted its loss and American leaders had stalled to avoid war. Looking for a winning issue in 1844, President Tyler had opened the subject again. Always seeking more slave territory, moreover, Secretary of State John C. Calhoun had inflamed matters by calling annexation essential to the security of slavery. By the time the Democratic convention assembled, the question of slavery and Texas dominated the election and riveted the delegates’ attention. Sensing the divisive potential of the Texas question, Van Buren and Clay tried to soft-pedal the issue by warning of war and calling for delay, but southern Democrats longed for Texas and refused to back down. As soon as the Democratic convention assembled, southerners seized control and imposed a rule requiring a two-thirds majority for the presidential nomination, enough to give them a veto over the outcome. The result was fatal to Van Buren, for the New Yorker fell short in the first round of voting in the sweltering hall. His share kept dwindling over seven tense and weary ballots, as one rival after another first surged and then faltered in pursuit of the necessary two-thirds. By nightfall, Van Buren had clearly lost, but who would take his place? When the convention recessed on the evening of May 28, candidates from Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Kentucky had exhausted their strength, and the friends of an obscure Tennessean named James K. Polk came forward. All day they had whispered around the hall that the former congressman and Bank War leader would make an excellent vice president. Just as they had hoped, others now suggested that this potential running mate might be the only candidate that all Democrats could support for the top spot. After all, Polk was an ardent expansionist, slaveholder, and Jacksonian who had not offended the Van Burenites. He had keen intelligence but little imagination, steady work habits, excellent political instincts, and support from Old Hickory himself. The following morning, Polk’s name won a few votes on the eighth ballot and swept the convention on the ninth, and delegates wore themselves out with cheering and giddy relief that their daunting job was done. Polk would triumph in November by calling for “the reannexation of Texas and the reoccupation of Oregon,” slipping past Henry Clay by a mere 39,000 votes out of nearly 2.6 million cast. The story of “Young Hickory’s” nomination and election taught several lessons for the future. Polk was the nation’s first dark horse, --- or unexpected, presidential nominee, but the private deals in smoke-filled rooms that brought him forward would only grow stronger in later years. Party nominating conventions and even the Second Party System itself were still new, but the race between Polk and Clay reinforced these institutions and brought out voters in increasingly familiar patterns, as party loyalty grew stronger. Popular republicanism would no longer give automatic preference to distinguished statesmen like Washington or even familiar figures like Van Buren or Clay, for a fickle national mood could overturn anyone. Above all, western expansion now excited Americans far more than economic questions, even at the cost of war. ## Democrats, Whigs, and the West The issues of 1844 had worried few Americans when Andrew Jackson left office in 1837. The fierce rhetoric of the Bank War still dominated politics, and no one knew how long the Whig and Democratic Parties would endure. Answers began to emerge, however, after Vice President Van Buren stepped forward to succeed the man he called his "Old Chief." The financial boom of Jackson's final years suddenly gave way to a severe panic, or depression, and hard times solidified the structures and ideologies of the rival parties. Reluctant Whigs learned the tricks of electioneering pageantry, and used them to defeat the Democrats as prosperity remained elusive. Recovery did not take the nation back into financial controversy, however, but fed the appeal of territorial growth. ### MARTIN VAN BUREN AND THE PANIC OF 1837 Andrew Jackson had long preferred Martin Van Buren as his successor, and nine years before James K. Polk's successful maneuvers, the Democratic Party had ratified his choice at another Baltimore convention in May 1835. The Whigs faced a harder decision that year. No single party member stood out above all others as a suitable candidate for president, and many Whigs disapproved of party conventions and caucuses to force a partisan choice upon reluctant freemen. Instead, Whigs in each major section supported a locally popular candidate. If they had any national strategy, it was to use local candidates to deny Van Buren an electoral majority and once more force a final choice upon the House of Representatives. --- General William Henry Harrison of Indiana became the favorite of western Whigs. Like Jackson, Harrison was a popular frontier general who had made his reputation fighting Indians in the War of 1812. Unlike Jackson, Harrison’s public career had faltered after the war, and he was working as the clerk of an Indiana county court at the time of his nomination. Undeterred, Whigs made the most of the military exploits of “Old Tippecanoe.” Harrison did not spell out his views on national policy, but broadly hinted that he favored the main outlines of Henry Clay’s American System, including a return to a national bank, a protective tariff, and generous expenditures for internal improvements. In the South, Whigs supported Judge Hugh Lawson White of Tennessee, a former Jacksonian who claimed that the wily Van Buren had led the Old Hero astray. White appealed to southerners who doubted the New Yorker’s commitment to slavery and bridled at the new structures of party discipline, but his strongest backers were orthodox Whigs who shared their party’s views on banking and internal improvements. Daniel Webster led his party in Massachusetts, but the three candidates’ efforts were to no avail. Van Buren took a clear majority of electoral votes, 170 out of 294, and proudly stepped forward as Old Hickory’s successor. Van Buren’s triumph was short-lived. Soon after his inauguration, overheated cotton prices began to chill and merchant houses in New Orleans, New York, and Liverpool started failing. Prices were soon in free fall and the nation’s financial system collapsed into the Panic of 1837. Banks suspended specie payments once again, thousands of urban workers lost their jobs, farmers and planters could not make payments on their overvalued acreage, bankruptcies multiplied, and the parties fell to blaming one another for the catastrophe. Whigs assailed Jacksonian currency experiments as unmitigated disasters, from the Bank veto to deposit removal to the Specie Circular. Democrats replied that traders, bankers, and speculators had no one to blame but themselves, that greed for instant riches had fed the inflationary spiral, and that the highfliers had reaped what they had sown. In fact, like the “Flush Times” that preceded it, the