errors. Under Queen Elizabeth, the Anglican Church --- had embraced a moderately Calvinist theology, conducted its services in English, and allowed its clergy to marry, but it retained Rome’s hierarchy of bishops and archbishops to supervise parish priests or ministers, and church courts to regulate public morals and religious teaching. Ministers wore Catholic-style vestments during services and read from an officially adopted Book of Common Prayer. Strict laws defined all English Christians as members of the Church of England, required them to attend its services, and demanded their acceptance of its doctrines and structure. Like their fellow English subjects, Puritans took enormous pride in England’s leadership of the Reformation. As in the days of the Old Testament, they concluded, God had made a covenant, or contract, with the English and made them his new chosen people, offering them special protection in exchange for their special devotion. This national covenant was a blessing and a burden, for God had held the Hebrews to higher standards than other nations. Surely He would treat the English likewise, but Puritans fretted that England had repaid God’s blessings with indifference. They saw shortcomings everywhere: neglect of public worship, sports and games on Sunday, immoral or indifferent clergy, commercial greed, and government corruption. Above all, Puritans complained that the Church of England included everyone in the realm, saints and sinners alike, when a true church should be more selective. With such abounding wickedness, who could escape God’s wrath? Puritan standards for individuals were as strict as their demands for their country. Devoted followers of John Calvin, they denied that anyone became a true Christian by birth or upbringing. Instead, genuine “saints” gained their faith through a lengthy process they called “conversion.” Usually beginning in young adulthood, anxious sinners worried that damnation was almost certain. After a long period of agonized study and prayer, however, the “elect” would slowly gain a hope, and then a more confident “assurance,” that God had decided to save them after all. In the joyous aftermath, devout converts still worried about overconfidence, and tested their own perceptions by constantly grilling their consciences and struggling to live righteous lives. Like other Calvinists, good Puritans were never certain of salvation — that knowledge belonged only to God — but they fervently hoped that moral progress might be a sign that God had chosen them indeed. By contrast, the Church of England taught that salvation was a lifelong process, not a distinct moment of radical change, and forgave --- the shortcomings of its members and clergy far more readily than its Puritan critics. Puritans were keenly aware of England’s social and economic ills, and blamed them on sins like greed and pride. No one expressed their concerns more vividly than John Winthrop, a Puritan gentleman and rural landowner. “The land growes weary of her inhabitants,” he reflected in 1629, “so that man, which is the most precious of all creatures, is here more vile and base than the earth they tread upon.” A stern but loving man, Winthrop immediately worried over the moral consequences of overpopulation. “Children, neighbors and friends,” he mourned, “especially of the poore, are counted the greatest burdens which if things were right, would be the highest earthly blessings.” Like other Puritans, Winthrop worried about rampant selfishness and dishonesty. As he put it, “All arts and trades are carried on in that deceitful manner and unrighteous course as it is almost impossible for a good upright man to maintain his charge and live comfortably in any of them.” Puritanism grew slowly in the reign of Elizabeth and continued to spread in the early seventeenth century. Reformers did not come from any single class, but they were most numerous in the middling ranks of society. Their movement was especially popular where people were abandoning the traditional economy to take up trading and manufacturing. Ironically, Puritans condemned greed and selfishness but they also praised frugality, self-control, and personal responsibility—useful virtues for worldly success. The sober-minded Puritan who rejected self-indulgence in favor of hard and steady work was more likely to prosper than his easygoing neighbors, so the Puritan faith found an undeniable affinity with the emerging capitalist economy. The leaders of the English church and government agreed that men and women should have good morals, but viewed their Puritan critics as potential subversives. English leaders believed that God had appointed them to protect righteous government and true religion with a firm hierarchy in church and state, beginning with the king himself and proceeding downward through archbishops and bishops, nobles and magistrates, parish priests, and ordinary parishioners. Puritans threatened this order by disputing Anglican doctrines, rejecting church hierarchy, and demanding a “converted” clergy. Fundamentally, English rulers opposed the Puritans for questioning God’s approval of the king, his ministers, and his church. Puritans were also unpopular among ordinary Englishmen who resented their campaign against minor faults and harmless amusements --- or hated their eternal soul-searching and fault-finding. Despite official suspicion and popular disapproval, however, most Puritans continued to worship in Anglican churches and refused to break openly with the authorities. Hoping to reform the church and state from within, they tried to stay out of trouble and prayed for the day when their chance would come. ### PLYMOUTH'S PILGRIMS A small number of the most zealous Puritans gave up on the Church of England. Insisting that the Anglican establishment was too corrupt to be a true church at all, Separatists wanted to withdraw from it altogether to form their own tiny congregations of fellow believers. Unlike most others, these Puritans faced serious persecution for their open rejection of the king’s religion. One special group of Separatists launched the first Puritan settlement in New England. Suffering from fines and imprisonment in 1608, a congregation from the village of Scrooby in Nottinghamshire first sought refuge in Calvinist Holland. After years of discouragements there, and worried that their children would grow up Dutch, the people who came to be known as Pilgrims decided to settle in Virginia. Obtaining financial backing and permission from the Virginia Company, their first contingent of 102 passengers set sail for America from the port town of Plymouth in 1620, tightly packed in a tiny ship called the *Mayflower*. Thirty-seven had been members of the Dutch congregation, joined by 22 of their servants and family members. The others were “strangers” who sailed for a variety of motives, including the hope for economic gain, but church members and their values dominated the expedition. Outside of New England, few English settlements would share their religious motives for migration. The Pilgrims were officially bound for the mouth of the Hudson River, then within the boundaries claimed by Virginia. Blown off course, the *Mayflower* actually landed on Cape Cod in mid-November, and its crew refused to go farther. A few passengers muttered that their settlement was illegal and its rules nonbinding outside of Virginia, so leaders persuaded the other men to sign an agreement later known as the Mayflower Compact, which tied them together as a “civil body politic” and bound them to rules of their own making. They then chose William Bradford as governor and a group of “assistants” to legislate with him, and went ashore to build the community they would call Plymouth, after their port of departure. --- The Mayflower Compact did not renounce the English Crown, but king and Parliament had no formal role in the government it created. Practically speaking then, Plymouth was America’s first republic, or government that the citizens elected without a functioning monarch or nobility. English authorities would eventually reclaim their authority, but the other early colonies in New England followed Plymouth’s example and made self-government a founding principle. As at Jamestown, conditions were grim during Plymouth’s first winter, and almost half the colonists died. Also as in Jamestown, there were Native Americans in the area with prior European contacts. Like “Don Luis” in the Chesapeake, a Patuxet Indian named Squanto had been to England, but returned to find his tribe dead or scattered from an epidemic. Squanto mediated between the Pilgrims and the nearby Wampanoags, interpreting for both sides and teaching the English to plant corn. Massasoit, the Wampanoag *sachem*, or chief, followed the same logic as Powhatan and thought the English could help him deal with rival tribes, and concluded a treaty of friendship. Though the Pilgrims shared the suspicion that most early modern Englishmen felt for those they termed “savages,” they refrained from wanton attacks and escaped Virginia’s early trauma of Indian warfare. The Plymouth colony grew slowly through further immigration and gradually gained the power to feed itself. After their first harvest in 1621, the Pilgrims invited Massasoit and his warriors to a five-day feast that later Americans remembered as the first Thanksgiving. They later won a firmer legal foundation when English authorities gave them retroactive permission to settle and govern themselves. Settled by married couples and their children, Plymouth enjoyed an equal sex ratio and a full range of ages from the outset. Families received land grants and established farms to raise foodstuffs, not tobacco. They bought supplies from England with exports of fish and furs. Until the 1675–1676 Indian war known as King Philip’s War, the Plymouth colony quietly grew and prospered in the southeast corner of modern Massachusetts. In 1691, a new royal charter merged the Plymouth colony with Massachusetts, its larger and more turbulent neighbor. ### MASSACHUSETTS’S GREAT MIGRATION King Charles I succeeded his father James I in 1625. Charles was more hostile to Puritanism than James, and even showed signs of nostalgia for Catholicism. William Laud, his archbishop of Canterbury, --- severely persecuted Puritans to "harry them out of the land." Charles also envied European kings who ruled as absolute monarchs, and tried to rule without consulting Parliament. His religious policies offended Puritans, and his political ambitions outraged the country gentlemen who dominated the House of Commons, many of whom were also Puritans. Rising tensions split the kingdom, with royalists and Anglicans increasingly on one side and parliamentary supporters and Puritans on the other. As conflict escalated in the late 1620s, John Winthrop and some other leading Puritans considered seeking refuge in America. Safe in the wilderness, they could devise more godly political and religious institutions and bring them back to England when the time was ripe. They would not establish freedom of religion, however. Like their Anglican and Catholic opponents, Puritans were sure that their own religion was the only truth, and that God required them to establish truth and punish falsehood. What they called their "godly commonwealth," or community founded on the common good, would establish their understanding of the true faith in true churches, and nothing else. To implement these plans, a few Puritan gentlemen took over an existing trading company, renamed it the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and won permission to found a settlement. In a daring legal maneuver, the directors then transformed their private company into a civil government located in America. As in Plymouth, the freemen, or free adult males of Massachusetts, chose a council of assistants and made John Winthrop their governor. They soon added that voters must be church members and created a legislature, or General Court, composed of town representatives. Governor Winthrop would serve 13 one-year terms between 1629 and his death in 1649. In June 1630, Winthrop and the first group of 400 settlers arrived at Massachusetts Bay in the *Arbella* and three other ships. Six hundred others soon followed them. Over the ensuing decade, about 10,000 settlers, most of them English Puritan couples with their children, would come to Massachusetts in an unprecedented mass movement that historians later called the Great Migration. "God’s Commonwealth" The newcomers built their first towns around the mouth of the Charles River, where it emptied into Massachusetts Bay. John Winthrop’s own group founded Boston on a peninsula jutting into the harbor from --- the river’s south shore. More supplies and colonists arrived in February 1631, but 200 still died the first winter, and more than 80 returned to England. Despite this perilous beginning, migrants kept coming. With intense idealism, they tried to create a reformed version of their homeland that conformed as much as possible to their understanding of God’s will. ### A COVENANTED PEOPLE The governing principles of Puritan commonwealths differed profoundly from those of the US Constitution, but still left a deep imprint on American culture. John Winthrop spelled them out in a famous sermon he delivered to passengers on the *Arbella*. Unlike Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence over a century later, Winthrop’s “A Modell of Christian Charity” began by firmly rejecting any notion of human equality. “God Almightie in his most holy and wise providence hath soe disposed of the Condicion of mankinde,” Winthrop explained, “as in all times some must be rich, some poore, some highe and eminent in power and dignitie[,] others meane and in subjeccion.” But Winthrop immediately linked inequality to the ideals of justice and mercy. Hierarchy existed to enforce God’s will on earth, he reminded his audience, so “no man is made more honorable than another or more wealthy etc., out of any particular and singular respect to himself, but for the glory of his Creator and the common good of ... man.” Bound by the spirit of Christian love, he explained, no man’s personal interests should overrule the needs of others, so social rank must support the greater goals of God’s service and the common good. Winthrop thought cooperation was more important in Massachusetts than other places because more was at stake. Proclaiming a national covenant like ancient Israel’s, he declared that New England’s sacred mission gave it a unique role in history and a special relationship with God. “Wee shall be as a Citty upon a Hill,” he admonished. “The eyes of all people are upon us.” This did not mean that Massachusetts was already a perfect society, but only that it ought to be. Like a biblical prophet, Winthrop warned his people to put religious obligations ahead of worldly interests, or “the Lord will surely breake out in wrathe against us[,] be revenged of such a perjured people[,] and make us know the price of the breache of such a Covenant ... till wee be consumed out of the good land whether wee are going.” Similar warnings about the special nature of America’s covenant with the --- Almighty would echo from future generations of religious and secular reformers, endlessly warning backsliders to reclaim the founders’ high standards to avoid a terrible fate. ### TOWN, CHURCH, AND COLONY Reflecting their commitment to church and community, the settlers of Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay did not scatter themselves like Chesapeake planters but lived in close-knit “towns” that were not truly urban places, but farming villages that strictly controlled their own local affairs. To create a town, a group of men, mostly heads of families, sought a land grant from the colony and spelled out their guiding principles in a written covenant modeled on the larger covenant they felt they had with God. In a typical example of 1636, the founders of Dedham, Massachusetts, committed themselves to “that most perfect rule, the foundation whereof is everlasting love,” and warned away those who could not comply: “We shall by all means labor to keep off from us all such as are contrary minded, and receive only such unto us as may be probably with one heart with us.” The founding ideals of these little communities thus linked the duty of mutual support to powerful pressures for conformity. Town leaders gave each man a plot of land that reflected his family’s size and social rank. Some towns distributed strips of land in large fields that the residents tilled together; others gave a separate farm to every household. All retained some common land to share later, and for grazing and timber in the meantime. Reflecting their commitment to mutuality, the adult men of a town continued to make major decisions in a general town meeting, but they often elected a committee of selectmen to handle routine public business. After some hesitation, Massachusetts Puritans decided to “gather,” or assemble, their churches according to their understanding of scripture. In each town, the most pious elders met for lengthy prayer and mutual interrogation until a small number recognized one another as properly converted “visible saints” with the right and duty to form a church. These men signed another covenant that spelled out their religious principles and invited some worthy man to become their minister. Over time, they would extend the privilege of church membership to other men and women who convinced them of their own conversions, but members who broke moral or religious laws could expect to be disciplined or expelled. Whether members or not, all the towns- --- people were required to attend weekly worship and pay taxes for the minister’s salary. Unlike the Church of England, New England church government was called congregational because each congregation ruled itself and chose its own minister, without control by an outside hierarchy. There was no denominational structure at first, but ministers maintained unity with regular meetings for prayer and consultation. The churches had no formal place in government, but only church members could vote, religious and secular leaders often overlapped, and magistrates punished anyone who strayed from Puritan doctrines. Careful not to press defiance too far, the churches of Massachusetts claimed formal communion with the Church of England while rejecting most of its practices. Puritan churches required a learned clergy who could properly expound their intricate doctrines. As early as 1636, a pious benefactor named John Harvard left money for the training of godly ministers, and Harvard College in nearby Cambridge was named in his honor. The colonial government also required each town to maintain a common school where children could learn to read the Bible. Even in Massachusetts’s earliest decades, Harvard graduates and other well-educated New Englanders began writing and publishing a large body of erudite sermons, tracts, theological treatises, poems, and chronicles, creating a rich intellectual life in the community and laying the basis for an American literary tradition. The Massachusetts economy rested on farming families who tilled their own land, perhaps with a servant or two. Wives and husbands had equally important responsibilities, with women in charge of cooking, cleaning, gardening, poultry, and the preservation of food, as well as the routines of childcare. Children learned their grown-up roles by helping and copying their parents, a practical education that was just as important as schoolwork. Unwitting agents of the Columbian exchange, husbands planted English crops like wheat, rye, oats, and peas, as well as Indian corn and pumpkins, and carefully tended horses, cows, and pigs. Hay was an important summer crop that carried livestock through bitter New England winters. Families who arrived first sold some of their harvests to the immigrants who arrived every season, and bought from them items like iron, lead, cloth, and salt. This trade carried the Bay Colony through its own “starving times” relatively quickly, and made it self-sustaining by the mid-1630s. After 1640, however, a looming political crisis in En- --- gland cut the flow of migrants, forcing New Englanders to shift from supplying newcomers to exporting fish, lumber, and furs instead. In an early sign of business talent, the prudent merchants of Boston, Salem, and other port towns also turned to shipping and shipbuilding as their colony began to flourish. Massachusetts Bay grew much faster than Virginia in its early decades. Most of the first Virginians were single men, but the Great Migration brought repeated shiploads of married couples with their children. Those who survived the first few brutal winters enjoyed long lives in a healthy climate. In the carefully studied town of Andover, Massachusetts, for example, most of the founders lived into their seventies while raising an average of 7.2 children to adulthood. Even when substantial immigration declined after 1640, the excess of births over deaths pushed the population of Massachusetts as high as 20,000 by 1660 and almost three times that by the end of the seventeenth century. A growing population spread more towns across eastern Massachusetts. In 1635, a group inspired by the Reverend Thomas Hooker traveled much farther west and founded the town of Hartford in the Connecticut River Valley. Their community became the nucleus of Connecticut, which established its own General Court and frame of government by 1639. Connecticut later absorbed the separate Puritan colony of New Haven. New Hampshire took shape to the north of the Merrimack River, but Massachusetts kept Maine until well into the nineteenth century. These spin-off colonies mostly grew harmoniously with Massachusetts Bay and collectively embraced its sense of mission and Puritan orthodoxy. The founding of the tiny enclave of Rhode Island, however, was not nearly so tranquil. ### THE CHALLENGE OF DISSENT One of the most noted early migrants to Massachusetts was the eloquent and learned young minister Roger Williams. A charming man whom everyone loved, Williams was also a doctrinal purist who could never keep tactful silence when he spotted a sin. Arriving in 1631, he began to preach in the town of Salem and immediately questioned the moral and legal basis for the entire colony. First he claimed that King Charles never owned Massachusetts so he had no right to grant lands there; the colony should invite the king to repent of his sin and correct it. Williams next declared that government had no right to regu --- late religion, so his Salem congregation should hold