and to raise money for ministers and their efforts. As they gained confidence, the same women aided the Benevolent Empire by dispensing Sunday school lessons and missionary literature and forming maternal associations to learn better methods of rearing and converting their own children. Before long, the church women of New York’s Burned-Over District were editing their own publications, such as the Presbyterian *Mother’s Magazine* and the Baptist *Mother’s Monthly Journal*, and pushing against the barriers that forbade their speaking in mixed congregations of men and women. It was a natural step from prompting conversion to supporting more public causes that also preferred a transformed heart over headstrong passions, and internal self-discipline over undependable external authorities, such as urban or frontier justice. All-male societies to promote temperance or Sabbath observance welcomed female auxiliaries; societies for antipoverty relief, prison reform, and colonization did the same. Many men were more doubtful, however, when Finney’s wife Lydia organized the New York Female Moral Reform Society in 1834 to denounce the sexual double standard, to rescue “fallen women,” and to embarrass their customers. Though male figures like ministers, editors, and politicians denounced “respectable” women who openly raised the subject of sex, the moral reformers pressed on, even publicizing the names of prominent men they spotted entering brothels. “Who among us can tell that our sisters and daughters are safe while the seducer is unhesitatingly received into our society and treated with that attention which virtue can claim?” they demanded, moving far beyond the “proper place” prescribed for them by an earlier generation of husbands and ministers. ### ANTISLAVERY WOMEN Women likewise played a crucial role in the antislavery movement, especially in its Garrisonian wing. Women also formed local antislavery groups, from the large Philadelphia Female Anti-Slavery Society down to village circles all over New England, New York, and northern Ohio. As in other reform efforts, they initially organized lectures and craft fairs to sell their cooking and needlework to raise money that male abolitionists would spend. By the mid-1830s, however, organized female abolitionists were flooding Congress with --- the antislavery petitions that so enraged the slaveholders’ representatives, collecting as many as two million signatures in one two-year period, and many more than that before final emancipation. They also supplied most of the signatures on those petitions. And female abolitionists wrote moving and persuasive antislavery polemics like *An Appeal in Favor of That Class of Americans Called Africans* by popular author Lydia Maria Child and, of course, *Uncle Tom’s Cabin* by Harriet Beecher Stowe. Sarah and Angelina Grimké were two especially distinguished female abolitionists and women’s rights advocates from Charleston, South Carolina. Born to a privileged, slaveholding family, Sarah developed an early hatred of slavery, and when she reached adulthood, she became a Quaker and moved to Philadelphia to escape slavery’s influence. Her younger sister Angelina joined her there and both became active in Quaker circles. As an eloquent former slaveholder, Sarah drew instant attention when she aired her views in the *Liberator*, and Garrison recruited the two as agents of the American Anti-Slavery Society. Their powerful pamphlets, including Angelina’s *An Appeal to the Christian Women of the South* (1836) and Sarah’s *An Epistle to the Clergy of the Southern States* (1836), won many readers, and the sisters became prominent public lecturers across New York and New England. In 1839, Angelina married prominent abolitionist Theodore Weld, and the three collaborated in editing *American Slavery as It Is*, a compilation from southern sources that documented slavery’s brutality. Abolitionism had a special appeal to white women like the Grimkés who identified closely with the sufferings of enslaved mothers. Like *Uncle Tom’s Cabin*, their writings repeatedly stressed that slaveholders beat women as mercilessly as men, that dealers parted families and sold babies from their mothers’ arms, and that enslaved women could never practice the virtues of “true womanhood,” or provide their families with ideal homes. Worst of all, abolitionist women did not hesitate to proclaim the sexual sinfulness of slavery: that slave women could be raped at any time without recourse, that they frequently bore their masters’ children, that light-skinned “fancy girls” were raised and sold specifically for sexual exploitation, and that white women must live with their husbands’ predations without protest. Perhaps for this reason, many white female abolitionists made special efforts to work closely with black women, joining biracial reform societies more commonly than men and denouncing northern prejudice along with southern slavery. “They *are our sisters,*” wrote Angelina --- Grimké. "To us, as women, they have a right to look for sympathy with their sorrows, and effort and prayer for their rescue." Women also admired the uncompromising "nonresistance" and antipolitical principles of Garrison’s American Anti-Slavery Society, which some male activists condemned as impractical. Garrison reciprocated by standing firm on the equality of the sexes as well as the races, both in and out of the abolition movement. The Grimkés’ willingness to speak before mixed groups of men and women horrified gender traditionalists. "We appreciate the unostentatious prayers and efforts of woman," Massachusetts ministers protested, "but when she assumes the place and tone of a man as a public reformer . . . her character becomes unnatural." The clergymen particularly opposed any mention of sex. "We especially deplore the intimate acquaintance and promiscuous conversation of females with regard to things ‘which ought not to be named,’" they wrote, inevitably soiling that "modesty and delicacy which is the charm of domestic life" and opening the door to "degeneracy and ruin." If flaunting themselves before white men were not bad enough, moreover, the Grimkés’ audiences included black men, leading to the ugliest insinuations of interracial promiscuity. Despite their friendship, Catharine Beecher thus condemned the sisters when they left "women’s sphere" to speak in public. Like their male counterparts, the Grimkés and other female abolitionists were showered with abuse, insults, and violence, especially when Pennsylvania Hall, the newly constructed headquarters of the Philadelphia Female Anti-Slavery Society, was burned in 1838. Sarah Grimké responded to attacks on her sister’s speechmaking with a blistering series of letters, published in 1838 as *Letters on the Equality of the Sexes*, in which she defended and spelled out the links between equality for blacks and for women. Going further, Angelina soon addressed the Massachusetts legislature on the subject of women’s rights, making her the first woman to appear before an American legislative body. Female activists still met insult and rebuff, however, even from other abolitionists. When Garrison appointed Abby Kelley to the business committee of the American Anti-Slavery Society in 1839, financial backers Lewis and Arthur Tappan quit in protest, bringing almost a third of its members to a rival organization, the American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society. In London the following year, the World’s Anti-Slavery Convention refused to seat the American female delegates, including Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. It was a slight that neither woman forgot. --- # WOMEN'S RIGHTS The debate over gender equality in the antislavery movement meshed with other trends in antebellum culture to support a pathbreaking movement for women’s rights. Following the Revolution, women had become more active in civic life, but the doctrine of republican motherhood still denied them the right to vote or hold office. But republican mothers needed good education, so schools for women spread, and some of their graduates gained the intellectual self-confidence to act on their own behalf. When working-class women protested the wages and conditions in New England textile mills, moreover, they built awareness of their unequal treatment both as workers and as women and learned invaluable lessons in leadership and organizing. Rising alcohol consumption directly led to more domestic violence and family neglect, which drew countless women to the temperance movement. Economic uncertainty also stimulated the women’s rights movement. The common law doctrine of coverture merged a wife’s legal identity with her husband’s. As long as she remained married, she could not own property, sign contracts, make a will, or file a lawsuit in her own name. Her children and her earnings belonged entirely to her husband, and creditors could seize any property she brought to the marriage to pay his debts. Divorce was nearly impossible, even in cases of abandonment. And though the economic gyrations of the Market Revolution brought a flood of middle- and upper-class bankruptcies, it was also very difficult for wealthy fathers to protect their daughters from their husbands’ misfortunes. Pushed by fathers and influenced by the calamitous Panic of 1839, Mississippi chipped away at the restrictions of coverture that year with the first married women’s property act. Women’s rights advocates took up the campaign and won a broader law in New York in 1848. Economic matters were also a central concern of the eccentric Scottish heiress Frances (or “Fanny”) Wright, one of the most remarkable early advocates of women’s rights. Unlike most American reformers, Wright drew her inspiration from Enlightenment and French revolutionary principles of reason and religious skepticism instead of evangelical Protestantism. She was also a passionate advocate for working men and women and their demands for public education and better pay and working conditions. Most shockingly, she had no use for domesticity, respectability, or Christianity. She denounced the restric- --- tions of conventional marriage and instead loudly called for sexual freedom, birth control, and more easily available divorce. Wright made her second trip to America in 1824, when she traveled with the marquis de Lafayette during his farewell tour of the United States. After visiting Robert Owen, founder of the utopian commune at New Harmony, Indiana, Wright decided to establish her own experimental community in Nashoba, Tennessee, where she hoped that slaves could gain freedom and education before moving to Haiti. When the colony failed, Wright further scandalized conservatives by living openly with Owen’s son, Robert Dale Owen, and launching a fiery lecturing career before mixed male and female audiences. Appearing onstage in a long flowing robe, Wright drew 1,500 to her first New York address and poured scorn on the failures of American republicanism, the oppression of women, the exploitation of artisans and workers, and unequal access to education. Wright made a sensational impression with her speeches and her newspaper, the *Free Enquirer*, but her religious and sexual nonconformity won her few friends outside a small circle of radical New York workingmen. The campaign for American women’s rights grew more directly from the reform mainstream, especially abolitionism. ### SENECA FALLS Soon after their rebuff at the World’s Anti-Slavery Convention in 1840, the famed Quaker abolitionist Lucretia Mott began discussing with Elizabeth Cady Stanton, wife of male abolitionist Henry Stanton, the idea of a women’s rights convention. When Mott revisited Stanton in 1848, they joined with three of Stanton’s Quaker friends and sent out a call for the world’s first women’s rights convention to assemble in Stanton’s hometown of Seneca Falls, New York, not far from the Erie Canal in the heart of the Burned-Over district. The Seneca Falls convention attracted about 300 white and black attendees, most of them abolitionists and about one-third of them male, including Frederick Douglass from nearby Rochester. After two days of speeches and debate, 100 participants signed a Declaration of Sentiments modeled directly on the republic’s founding document. Beginning with the stirring affirmation that “all men and women are created equal,” the declaration proclaimed that “the history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an --- absolute tyranny over her." It protested that wives were "civilly dead" in the eyes of the law, while women could not attend college, enter the higher professions, earn equal wages, or leave their "proper sphere." Most explosively, it demanded for women the right to vote. The Seneca Falls convention drew widespread ridicule, but unlike Fanny Wright’s shocking appearances, this movement did not fade away. Two years later, 1,000 participants attended the first national women’s rights convention in Worcester, Massachusetts, and others met every year but one before 1860. In each case, the call for women’s suffrage grew more insistent. The demand would not be met until 1920, with the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the US Constitution, but the Seneca Falls convention had launched a movement for gender equality that continues to the present. # A Cultural Renaissance The antebellum United States experienced a burst of cultural creativity that many republicans had hoped for and that paralleled the nation’s vigorous economic and geographical expansion. "I must study Politicks and War that my sons may have liberty to study Painting and Poetry[,] Mathematicks and Philosophy," John Adams had mused to his wife, Abigail, in 1780. "My sons ought to study Mathematicks and Philosophy, Geography, natural History, Naval Architecture, navigation, Commerce and Agriculture, in order to give their Children a right to study Painting, Poetry, Musick, Architecture, Statuary, Tapestry and Porcelaine." Adams’s hopes were not easily realized. "In the four quarters of the globe," sneered a British critic in 1820, "who reads an American book?" But even as he asked his question, a cultural movement now known as the American Renaissance was beginning that celebrated equality and self-reliance in many new forms of writing, music, art, and entertainment. Originally applied to a small group of white male writers of the 1850s, "American Renaissance" more usefully describes a diverse cultural flowering in antebellum America that displayed some common themes and many racial, class, and gendered variations. Different kinds of entertainment appealed to country dwellers and urban workers, for example, and the men and women of the urban middle class likewise had their own preferences. The black community created an extraordinary musical legacy and produced a rich literature on resistance to slavery. Especially in Boston and New York, self-conscious writers, artists, and intellectuals tried to produce uniquely American work that --- would stand comparison with the polished arts of Europe. Within this broad variety, and consistent with their confident boasts to foreign visitors, northern Americans consistently championed the free individual, the opportunities available in a free society, and the value of what they called “free labor.” A few prominent examples can illustrate the depth and variety of their creative efforts. ## RURAL AND URBAN FRONTIERS The music, stories, and amusements of rural Americans revolved around their work and their civic rituals. Work parties like cornhuskings and barn raisings were not only crucial to the farm economy, but also welcome occasions for folk arts like music, storytelling, and dancing, often accompanied by homemade whiskey or brandy. The same was true for public events like militia musters, elections, and Fourth of July observances. Though dismaying to temperance reformers, public drinking naturally led to tall tales, boasting, and brawling, in which a celebration of republican virtue led to glorification of men’s personal power. Renowned fighters kept their thumbnails sharp to gouge the eyes of their enemies, while western “ring-tailed roarers” bragged of being “half-horse, half-alligator, with a little touch of snapping turtle.” Adopting this swashbuckling style in his 1834 autobiography, Congressman David Crockett struck a pose for countless “Wild West” characters of the future. Exaggerated boasts of white male strength and valor became comic raw materials for Mark Twain and other writers known as the “southwestern humorists.” Urban workers’ entertainment celebrated white male strength and equality in other ways. Nineteenth-century Americans were passionately fond of the theater, for example. Perhaps surprisingly to modern Americans, the plays of William Shakespeare were highly popular at every level of income and education, but audiences expressed their class and patriotic loyalties through support for rival actors. In 1849, working-class fans of American actor Edwin Forrest tried to block a performance of *Macbeth* by English favorite William Charles Macready at New York’s opulent Astor Place Theater. A crowd of 10,000 armed with stones and incited by placards demanding “**SHALL AMERICANS OR ENGLISH RULE THIS CITY?**” became so unruly that 300 militiamen opened fire. In the Astor Place Riot, 25 New Yorkers died, bloody testimony to workers’ hatred of presumed English (and American) aristocracy. A craze for blackface minstrel shows reflected other values of --- northern white workers. In 1828, a little-known white actor named Thomas D. Rice disguised himself as a caricatured black man singing, “Weel about and turn about and do jis so, Eb’ry time I turn about I jump Jim Crow.” By the mid-1830s, minstrel shows, which featured white men with blackened faces playing stereotyped black characters, had become one of the most popular forms of northern urban entertainment, especially for white male workers. Classic American melodies such as “Swanee River,” “Jimmy Crack Corn,” “Oh! Susannah,” and “Dixie” all had their origins on the minstrel stage. The typical minstrel show featured clownish plantation characters such as Bones and Tambo, whose songs and jokes made fun of Mr. Interlocutor, a pompous straight man. Zip Coon was a dandified free black character whose oafish attempts to imitate upper-class whites made him (and them) look ridiculous. The antics of imitation black buffoons obviously flattered white racism, but a blackface disguise also made it easier to mock respectable targets like the wealthy or temperance reformers, and to express envy for blacks’ imagined carefree playfulness and sexual promiscuity. Depicting a proslavery version of plantation life, minstrel shows celebrated the ideology of President Andrew Jackson’s Democratic Party and played a conspicuous part in its campaign events. Like western bragging and theater riots, the minstrel show appealed to American workers who cherished liberty and equality but worried about preserving them in a topsy-turvy world. Americans also loved mass-market literature that new means of printing and distribution made widely available. Dozens of popular male and female authors turned out hundreds of sentimental novels and stories, mostly intended for women. Filled with lost lovers, swooning maidens, and expiring babes, these tales were easy to mock, but carried important messages. Implicitly struggling with the contradiction between women’s moral responsibility and their physical and political powerlessness, the writers of sentimental fiction assured readers that they had the moral force to transform a wicked world without violating the restrictions of “true womanhood.” For young men, journalist E. Z. C. Judson used the pen name Ned Buntline to churn out dozens of thrillers about Indian fighting, New York gangs, slum life, and nautical adventures. Characteristically, perhaps, Buntline was one of the main organizers of the Astor Place Riot. In a similar vein, George Lippard fed men’s fantasies with fictionalized historical romances and lurid depictions of city life and social injustice that enjoyed great commercial success. Like the sentimental stories --- that attracted female readers, sensationalist fiction and journalism offered men a heroic and idealized world with richly imaginative alternatives to any frustrations they may have felt in humdrum daily life. # ROMANTICISM The glorification of free individuals extended beyond mass entertainment. With political independence confirmed and hopes rising for every kind of improvement, ambitious American writers and painters hoped to match the cultural achievements of Europe. Less concerned than reformers with republican community, these artists were more likely to probe the meaning of freedom and equality for individuals. Many embraced the transatlantic cultural trend called romanticism. As early as the mid-eighteenth century, many intellectuals had begun to worry that the Enlightenment’s cool rationalism had obscured spiritual and emotional truths. Stimulated by German philosophers like Immanuel Kant, romantics asserted that feelings and intuitions could lead to deeper and more powerful knowledge than reason alone. Under these influences, European artists increasingly tried to evoke powerful emotional responses in their work, ranging from the stormy musical compositions of Ludwig van Beethoven to the dreamy and mystical images of English poets like William Wordsworth, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and Lord Byron. Romantics were also less interested in the universal political principles of the American and French Revolutions than in the unique qualities of heroic individuals and nations. Self-consciously creative Americans embraced the romantic impulse in the generation following 1815. Revivalists and reformers shared the romantic belief that emotional knowledge was deeper and more powerful than mere intellectual reasoning, and relied on feelings to reach their audiences. Romantic nationalists imagined that every people possessed a unique character or spirit apparent in their culture, and cherished their own national identity above all others. New respect for the moral authority of women stemmed from the view that women’s emotions brought them closer to spiritual truth than the calculations of men. American painters used awe-inspiring landscapes to suggest that the grandeur of nature could teach deeper lessons than academic instruction. When politicians extolled “the rising glory of the Republic,” they shared the message that patriotic feelings said more about national destiny than dry disquisitions like *The