the Market Revolution and the moral imperatives of the Second Great Awakening with the intellectual and political tools of Revolutionary republicanism. When those controversies subsided, the slavery question erupted again and split the nation more deeply than anyone ever intended. ## An Era of Good Feelings? The roots of the Second Party System lay in the aftermath of the War of 1812. Disgraced by its opposition to the war, the Federalist Party ran its last presidential candidate in 1816. Thereafter, virtually all politicians called themselves Republicans, and the United States entered a period of one-party politics known as the Era of Good Feelings, despite its very serious personal and policy disputes. Unthreatened by Federalism, Republicans began to test Jeffersonian orthodoxy in ways that brought sharp controversies and opened the way for a strong counterreaction. --- # NEW LEADERS, NEW CHALLENGES As they celebrated the coming of peace in 1815, farsighted American leaders worried about problems the war had exposed, and pushed for government aid to economic development (see chapter 8). Congress faced these demands with new leadership. Antiwar sentiment and threatened secession made the Federalist Party seem hopelessly unpatriotic. Innovative Federalists like Daniel Webster held on in New England, but the party collapsed in other regions. Rufus King of New York won 34 electoral votes as the Federalist candidate for president in 1816, but his Republican opponent, James Monroe of Virginia, swamped him with 183, and the Federalists never proposed another candidate. As Federalism faded, Congress and the Cabinet filled up with younger Republicans, many from the South and West. Men such as Henry Clay of Kentucky, John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, and John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts had been too young to serve in the Revolution, or even to participate in the ratification of the Constitution. Many of them had been War Hawks in 1812 and ardently longed for economic and territorial expansion. Unlike some of their Federalist predecessors, these younger Jeffersonians embraced universal white male suffrage, though some still counted on local elites to deliver their votes and believed that wise leaders could overrule public opinion. Some were highly educated, like Adams and Calhoun; others were mostly self-taught, like Henry Clay. Whatever their origins, the most prominent postwar Republicans felt a need for economic development and did not cling to older party dogmas like small government and strict construction. When the Fourteenth Congress assembled in the fall of 1815, President Madison proposed three departures from Republican orthodoxy. Though he had strongly opposed the First Bank of the United States, he now asked Congress for a new national bank to repair the government’s finances. To protect the struggling industries fostered by war, he asked for a mild protective tariff to make foreign imports more expensive than American manufactures. Finally, he asked Congress for a constitutional means to build a national system of internal improvements. Wartime problems had proved the need for such Federalist-style measures, and the death of Federalism itself had removed them from partisan contention. Congress responded favorably. In 1816, it chartered a new and --- larger Bank of the United States for a term of 20 years. The government would supply one-fifth of its $35 million in capital, select 5 of the 25 directors, and grant it a monopoly of its banking business. In return for these privileges, the Bank would pay the government a bonus of $1.5 million and issue paper notes for a uniform national currency. The protective tariff won approval a few weeks later but internal improvements proved harder to achieve. The Constitution gave Congress power to *“establish* post Roads” (italics added) but did not mention *building* them, so strict constructionists would not act without a constitutional amendment to authorize federal spending on transportation. The friends of internal improvements resisted that step, fearing that the amendment process was too risky and too cumbersome. Instead, Representative John C. Calhoun proposed to devote nontax funds—the dividends and bonus from the Bank—to an internal improvements fund, but his reasoning did not satisfy President Monroe (who succeeded James Madison in 1817), so he vetoed the Bonus Bill as unconstitutional. Monroe’s veto did not satisfy traditional Jeffersonians, who called themselves Old Republicans and clung to earlier party doctrines. “Who could have supposed when Mr. Jefferson went out of office,” mourned North Carolina senator Nathaniel Macon in 1818, “that his principles . . . would so soon have become unfashionable?” Led by Representative John Randolph of Roanoke, a brilliant though eccentric Virginian, the Old Republicans railed that power might corrupt anybody and frankly worried that broad construction would lead to meddling with slavery. As Macon put it, “If Congress can make banks, roads and canals under the constitution; they can free any slave in the United States.” In the heady days after 1816, few heeded the Old Republicans, so a new generation eagerly looked forward to the energetic use of government. To crown its handiwork, the Fourteenth Congress gave itself a raise. “To attract and secure ability and integrity to the public service,” Calhoun explained, congressmen deserved a salary of $1,500 a year instead of an allowance of $6.00 per day, even though laborers earned only $0.50 for 12–14 hours of toil and $2.00 would buy an acre of public land. The pay raise was a symbol of lingering elitism among the post-1815 crop of Republican leaders. Much to their astonishment, the action infuriated ordinary Americans who thought that ability and integrity should not be so costly among a virtuous people. Reeling from grievous crop failures inflicted by the brutally cold summer of 1816 --- ("eighteen-hundred-and-froze-to-death"), angry voters expelled two-thirds of their extravagant representatives in the fall elections. It was a display of democratic rebellion that national political leaders were completely unused to, but would witness again in the future. ## FLORIDA AND THE FIRST SEMINOLE WAR Elected in 1816, President James Monroe was a Virginia neighbor of Jefferson and Madison. He was the last president to wear the powdered wig and knee breeches of an eighteenth-century gentleman and nearly the last Revolutionary in high office. To conciliate Federalists who still resented the recent war, Monroe toured New England shortly after his inauguration and attracted widespread popular applause. A Boston paper rejoiced that Federalists and Republicans who had not spoken for years were coming together to welcome the president, and proclaimed an "Era of Good Feelings." This label for Monroe’s administration survived, but events proved that tensions still boiled beneath the surface. Indian warfare and geographical expansion provided an early example. After defeating the Red Sticks in 1814, General Andrew Jackson had forced the Creek Indians to surrender vast territories along Georgia’s border with Spanish Florida and north into Alabama and Mississippi. He had also won sizable cessions from the Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Cherokees, until the southwestern tribes had lost as many as 50 million acres by 1820. Several bands of displaced Creeks then sought refuge with their Seminole relatives in Spanish Florida and continued attacks on American settlers. Even more ominously from the American perspective, a former British outpost near the Gulf coast had become the “Negro Fort,” sheltering hundreds of runaway slaves. Spain seemed powerless to stop either group. An American expedition destroyed the Negro Fort in the fall of 1816, killing most of the occupants and reenslaving the rest, but clashes with the Seminoles continued to escalate. The First Seminole War formally began in early 1818, when Monroe ordered Jackson to enter Florida and subdue the Indians without disturbing the Spanish. The headstrong general not only laid waste to the Seminoles’ towns, but went on to exceed his orders by seizing most of the Florida panhandle, occupying its Spanish settlements, and executing two British subjects whom he accused of arming and inciting the Indians. These actions naturally outraged the Spanish and British governments and provoked --- a storm of criticism in Congress and the Cabinet. Jackson narrowly escaped an official rebuke by claiming secret authorization from the president, but he thrilled expansionists and proved that Spain had lost its hold on Florida. President Monroe and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams may have disapproved of Jackson’s methods, but they welcomed the result and used it to pressure Spain for its thinly settled colony. In 1819, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams and Spanish minister Luis de Onís signed the Adams–Onís Treaty, granting Florida to the United States and settling the border between the Louisiana Purchase and New Spain. In return, the United States agreed to cover up to $5 million of Spain’s debts to American citizens. Still defiant, the Seminoles fled deeper into Florida’s wilderness to fight twice more in the Second Seminole War of 1835–1842 and the Third Seminole War of 1855–1858. ### PANIC AND ITS REMEDIES The United States acquired Florida in a period of postwar economic boom. Europe’s demand for American foodstuffs, cotton, and wool briefly stayed high, sustaining prosperity for New England farmers and southern planters alike. Settlers were especially hungry for the new cotton lands that Jackson had wrested from the Indians. The government encouraged speculation by extending credit to land buyers, and banks offered generous loans to expansive merchants. Prosperity seemed endless and Americans who embraced the market economy reveled in their good fortune. The bubble inevitably collapsed as a European recession and recovery by its farms cut demand for American products. The tipping point came in late 1818, when the Bank of the United States sought specie from its debtor banks to make the final payment for Louisiana. To comply, the state banks denied new loans and pressed their borrowers for repayment, but the combination of weaker demand and tighter credit drove down prices for cotton, lands, and slaves, and sent thousands of planters and speculators into bankruptcy. Customers rushed to trade banknotes for coins, but the banks suspended specie payments again. The Panic of 1819 had frozen the commercial economy. The panic hit unevenly. It hardly touched yeomen who grew their own food and owed no money. Wage earners suffered unemployment until wages and prices reached a new equilibrium. Land buyers who --- had gambled on continuously rising prices faced destruction, and distress was probably greatest on the cotton frontier. Suffering from early years of poor management, the Bank of the United States struggled to maintain its own solvency and pushed its debtors relentlessly. Throughout the South and West, defaulting borrowers watched helplessly as farms and property vanished under the auctioneer’s hammer. “The Bank was saved but the people were ruined,” one commentator noted bitterly, and the Bank won many enemies. The panic renewed debate over government support for economic development. Old Republicans repeated their criticisms of banking, commerce, speculations, and industry. Congressman Philip P. Barbour of Virginia praised old-fashioned citizens—property owners, not wage earners—“who do not receive their daily bread from the hand of another, but from their own voluntary labor upon their own soil; who have some stake in the Government, who feel and take an interest in public affairs, and are ready and willing to defend themselves as men and citizens in their rights of property, and civil and political liberty.” He and other Old Republicans wanted to fight the panic by reviving strict construction, withholding aid from manufactures and commerce, and returning to a simple and virtuous landholding economy. Only slaves, he suggested, should work for others or follow orders. More-optimistic Republicans disagreed and called for more economic change instead of less. As the depression began lifting in 1824, President Monroe endorsed this approach by favoring a higher tariff. Henry Clay of Kentucky, Speaker of the House of Representatives, became the measure’s greatest advocate and proposed an even broader plan for national development. Clay called his program for government guidance of economic change the “American System” in contrast to what he called the “British System” of “laissez-faire,” a French expression meaning no government control of the economy. The American System became the leading theme of Clay’s long career in American public life. Replying to Barbour, Clay rejected crude self-sufficiency and proclaimed instead that “the greatest want of civilized society is a market for the ... produce of the labor of its members.” To create this market, the American System would raise tariffs to stimulate industry, support the Bank of the United States as a source of credit and currency, and sell public lands at high prices to pay for a national transportation network. With flourishing manufactures, credit, and transportation, farmers could sell more crops to cities, and city businesses could sell --- farmers more goods, so the whole country would benefit, even southern planters. Clay countered Barbour’s critique of hired workers by insisting that “idleness and vice” posed “the greatest danger to public liberty,” not wage earners. Congress accepted these arguments in 1824 and raised the tariff to an average of 37 percent on most imports, but the debate over economic development was far from over. # Conflict Returns Party conflict ebbed in the so-called Era of Good Feelings, but policy disputes continued. The Bank, the tariff, internal improvements, and the congressional salary increase proved more unpopular than ambitious young Republicans had imagined, and angry voters punished them in 1816. The panic brought widespread distress just as a bitter dispute over slavery revealed sectional animosity. The presidential election of 1824 seemed to show that greed for office and neglect of founding principles had replaced republican virtue with corruption. At the end of the 1820s, most voters would heed these apparent omens and embrace a leader who claimed that unfettered popular democracy—like the vote against Congress’s pay raise—could restore the republic’s purity. ## MISSOURI COMPROMISE AND MONROE DOCTRINE Western settlement had passed the Mississippi after 1815, leading the territory of Missouri to seek statehood in 1819. When the House considered approval, Representative James Tallmadge Jr. of New York startled his colleagues with amendments to prohibit the further importation of slaves into Missouri and to free the unborn children of those who lived there already. Talmadge’s proposals drew ready support from northern congressmen, for their states had ended slavery with similar laws. While they did not want racial equality or claim any power over slavery in existing states, they believed that southerners had implicitly promised to follow their example. So far, the three-fifths clause had helped southerners elect every president but one, so northerners also longed to reduce that advantage. A few northern congressmen went further and attacked slavery on moral grounds. Senator Rufus King of New York, the last Federalist candidate for president, claimed that slavery defied the laws of God so no human law could justify it. Arthur Livermore of --- New Hampshire called slavery "a sin which sits heavy on the souls of every one of us." Southerners furiously rejected these sentiments. No matter how they felt about slavery—and some still claimed to deplore it—they denied that the national government had any power to end it in Missouri or anywhere else. The Constitution made new states equal to the old, they argued, so Missouri had the same right to slavery as Georgia, and northerners only raised the issue to gain power. Besides, they claimed, slavery would be easier and safer to end if slaves were widely and thinly dispersed, so extending it westward would hasten its disappearance. Meanwhile, agitating the question could inspire a slave revolt. Other southerners defended bondage in more positive terms. Slavery was a benevolent institution that benefited both races, they insisted. It was economically necessary, not only in the existing slave states, but also in the West. The Bible authorized it, and the Declaration of Independence did not apply to blacks. The antislavery argument, cried Senator John W. Walker of Alabama, "unhinges the Union at a dash." Though most whites probably worried more about the Panic of 1819 than slavery in Missouri, the issue overwhelmed Congress in 1819 and 1820. The House adopted the Tallmadge amendments but the Senate refused, and all other business ground to a halt. Congressmen shocked one another with explosions of passion and freely discussed the possibility of disunion. "If you persist," Georgia Congressman Thomas W. Cobb grimly warned the restrictionists, "the Union will be dissolved. You have kindled a fire which all the waters of the ocean cannot put out, which seas of blood can only extinguish." James Tallmadge retorted, "If civil war must come, I can only say, let it come!" Hoping to settle the crisis, Henry Clay supported the Missouri Compromise in 1820: Missouri would be admitted to the Union with slavery, but slavery would be barred from the Louisiana Purchase north of 36°30', Missouri's southern boundary. Detached from Massachusetts, Maine would also gain statehood, and thus the equal number of slave and free states in the Senate would be maintained. Thinking they had won a victory by protecting slavery in Missouri, 39 southern congressmen agreed to give up slavery in the rest of the Louisiana Purchase, but went down to defeat in the next election. Of the northern congressmen, 18 broke sectional ranks as well and voted to permit slavery in Missouri. Instead of thanking them for this support, Virginia representative John Randolph of Roanoke mocked the mavericks as cowardly "doughfaces," and the name stuck for decades to describe --- "northern men with southern principles." On both sides, congressmen who made concessions to the other side faced bitter criticism at home in a telling sign of slavery’s divisiveness. The Missouri crisis was the first major sectional controversy since the secret slavery debates in the Constitutional Convention, and it shocked Americans who thought that real political controversy pitted Republicans against Federalists, not Republicans against each other. "This momentous question, like a fire bell in the night, awakened and filled me with terror," the aging Jefferson admitted. "I considered it at once as the knell of the Union." Once a moral principle divided the Union into rival sections, he feared, rancor would increase until his life’s work collapsed. Less philosophical politicians tried to put the issue behind them. Southerners decided that the compromise protected them. Northerners continued to disapprove, but most concluded that fighting slavery would not be worth the cost. Both feared its powerful divisiveness. President James Monroe offered little public leadership in the Missouri crisis, but left his name instead on a foreign policy that cast a long shadow on future American diplomacy. Independence movements had appeared in most of Spain’s American colonies during the Napoleonic Wars, but Spain tried to reclaim its territories when French power collapsed in 1815. Britain and the United States opposed Spain’s move because independence would open Latin America to their trade. Britain thus asked the United States for a joint declaration against Spain’s return, but Monroe and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams refused to become lesser participants in a British initiative. Instead, the president used his annual message of 1823 to proclaim what became known as the Monroe Doctrine. While the United States would not interfere in European affairs, including its republican revolutions, it would oppose all efforts to establish new colonies or reestablish old ones in the Americas. On the surface, Monroe’s declaration supported the independence of fellow republics, but it subtly implied that the United States should dominate Latin America itself. It thus became the rationale for future American interventions. ### THE ELECTION OF 1824 Personal rivalries also ruffled the Era of Good Feelings. No one opposed Monroe’s reelection in 1820, but a crowd of Washington insiders jostled to succeed him in 1824. Secretary of the Treasury William H. --- Crawford of Georgia was the first choice of many southerners and Old Republicans, as well as Republican Party bosses like Senator Martin Van Buren of New York. The New England favorite was John Quincy Adams, secretary of state and son of former president John Adams. Congressman Henry Clay of Kentucky sought to represent the West. Secretary of War John C. Calhoun of South Carolina also aspired to the White House but ultimately accepted the vice presidency instead. In previous elections, Democratic-Republicans had used a caucus, or meeting, of all Republican congressmen to unite behind a single candidate, but this device had come to seem dictatorial by 1824. A small caucus eventually gave its nod to Crawford when other candidates’ supporters refused to attend, but the prize did him little good in the end. When the Tennessee legislature added the name of General Andrew Jackson to the list in 1822, no one but Jackson himself expected his candidacy to go very far. Standing apart from the other candidates, Jackson had grown up on the Carolina frontier without the social, educational, or economic advantages of the “better sort.” He served as a boy in the American Revolution, lost his family in the war, and worked his way into the legal profession on his own. Moving to Nashville, Tennessee, the hot-tempered Jackson married well and gained a fortune from legal practice, planting, and land speculation, while fighting duels and trading slaves on his way to the top. He tried his hand at civilian politics but much preferred the office of major general of the Tennessee militia, which brought him victory at New Orleans and the status of national hero. Along the way, his soldiers nicknamed him “Old Hickory” since his wartime endurance matched the toughest timber in the forest. Quietly accepting adulation, Jackson began to think of himself as the one man who could clean up the antirepublican corruption embodied in the scramble to succeed Monroe. Previous presidents had always risen through polished family backgrounds and distinguished civilian service, however, so experienced politicians did not take the frontier general seriously. Campaigning was dignified and discreet in 1824 because republican customs forbade expressions of ambition or self-promotion. The candidates corresponded instead with influential friends who