little towns like Fayetteville, North Carolina. The struggle marked the era’s clearest confrontation between republican traditions and the economic forces of the Market Revolution. ## THE MONSTER The charter of the Second Bank of the United States would expire in 1836, the last year of Andrew Jackson’s second term. Under its latest president, Philadelphia patrician Nicholas Biddle, the Bank still profited its private stockholders, but it also sought to stabilize the currency and economy like a modern central bank by lending to state banks when credit was tight. When business conditions improved, the Bank discouraged excessive lending and note issue by promptly demanding specie when it received state banknotes from its customers. A stable currency was increasingly important as more and more Americans depended on paper money, so many saw the Bank as crucial to the nation’s affairs. Old Hickory and other traditional Republicans thought otherwise, and saw the “Monster Bank,” or “Hydra of Corruption,” as a gigantic private entity with far too much power over public business. Eventually many Jacksonians spoke of the Bank as part of a far larger financial network they dubbed the “Money Power” that conspired to enrich insiders and subvert the republic by manipulating credit and currency. In their eyes, all banks juggled prices and the money supply by issuing or withholding loans, tempting individuals to overextend themselves, and then ruining them with panics. They fostered a “moneyed aristocracy” built on paper instead of land. Above all, they bred inequality because they depended on privileges such as corporate charters and limited liability, and their need for legislative protection led inevitably to corruption. Rather than the “rag money” of the “Money Power,” Jackson wanted a more reliable currency of gold and silver. “The bank . . . is trying to kill me,” he swore to Van Buren, *“but I will kill it!”* Congress sent Jackson a bill to recharter the Bank of the United States in early July 1832, and he replied with a thunderous veto message excoriating special privileges. Using strict constructionist logic, the message condemned the Bank as unconstitutional, despite Supreme Court approval in *McCulloch v. Maryland* (1819) and *Osborn v. Bank of the United States* (1824). Most significantly, Jackson branded the Bank as undemocratic. “The rich and powerful too often bend the acts --- of government to their selfish purposes,” he noted. Though some inequality was natural and inevitable, “when the laws undertake to make the rich richer and the potent more powerful, the humble members of society—the farmers, mechanics and laborers—who have neither the time nor the means of securing like favors to themselves, have a right to complain of the injustice of their Government.” The looming presidential election of 1832 would pit Jackson against Henry Clay, whose supporters now called themselves the National Republicans. The veto was a brilliant cornerstone for Jackson’s campaign. It spoke directly to millions of voters who feared that economic changes had subjected them to “monsters”—invisible and unnatural forces that lifted the corrupt few above the virtuous many. These voters cheered the veto message at noisy rallies, parades, and barbecues, and rejoiced at defeating a presumed aristocracy. Deaf to the cheering, National Republicans badly misgauged the veto’s impact. Biddle compared it to a wild manifesto from the French Revolution and even circulated it as campaign literature, convinced that the president’s words would destroy him. Instead, Jackson defeated Clay handily and girded himself for a final battle against the Bank. The Bank of the United States remained in business under its old charter. Fearing that Biddle would use its funds to buy another charter from a friendlier Congress, Jackson struck first by ordering withdrawal of the government’s deposits, depriving the Bank of its biggest customer and seriously trimming its power. Demanding strict obedience, the president fired two secretaries of the Treasury until his third agreed to place the government’s funds in five “pet” banks, all managed by reliable Democrats. Deposit removal proved immensely controversial. Many congressmen saw it as a blatant violation of the Bank’s charter, a dangerous usurpation of power, and even a step toward dictatorship. “We are in the midst of a revolution,” Clay warned the Senate, “hitherto bloodless, but rapidly tending toward a total change of the pure republican character of the government, and to the concentration of power in the hands of one man.” Matters worsened when Biddle denied new loans and demanded repayment of old ones. The loss of federal funds required some adjustment, but Biddle contracted more than necessary in a deliberate effort to extort a new charter. Deprived of credit in the winter of 1833–1834, businesses reduced their purchases and laid off workers, generating reams of angry petitions from crippled trades and industries. Jack- --- son was unmoved. “Go to Nicholas Biddle!” he roared to protestors. “We have no money here, gentlemen.” Biddle would not relent either. “Nothing but the evidence of suffering abroad will produce any effect in Congress,” he noted grimly. “All the other Banks and all the merchants may break, but the Bank of the United States shall not break.” ## DEPOSIT REMOVAL AND THE PARTY SYSTEM Deposit removal galvanized Jackson’s opponents. Recalling the Revolution, a coalition of National Republicans, nullifiers, and pro-Bank Democrats began to call the president “King Andrew the First” and themselves “Whigs,” after the British and colonial faction that resisted the Crown. At Clay’s urging, the Senate censured Jackson in the spring of 1834, and the Whigs contested local elections from New York City to villages like Fayetteville, North Carolina. Jackson’s financial tampering had inspired a permanent opposition party with far greater appeal than National Republicans had ever enjoyed. Biddle’s disdain for elected government enraged Democrats even more. “I for one say perish credit, perish commerce,” one congressman roared. “Give us a broken, a deranged, and a worthless currency rather than the ignoble and corrupting tyranny of an irresponsible corporation.” Calling himself “the direct representative of the American people,” Jackson claimed that presidential authority was more democratic and thus more legitimate than the power of Congress, which was too often captured by local or special interests. Both parties defended themselves with republican traditions, but Democrats cited the superior virtue of the people while Whigs demanded respect for the law and limits on executive power. The early Whig Party was a motley assortment of Jackson’s critics, but most Whigs eventually rallied to Henry Clay’s American System and the broad constructionist theories that justified it. They demanded a strong currency and a stable banking system, preferably under a revived Bank of the United States, and federal support for internal improvements, paid for by the sale of public lands. Led by Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, the Whigs insisted that the economic interests of North and South, city and countryside, were all complementary and reconcilable by compromise, and spoke for citizens who embraced the Market Revolution and wanted the government to promote it. By contrast, Democrats worried that corporations, banks, and industry could subvert republican equality. While they did not resist all economic progress, especially at the state level, they usually opposed --- federal subsidies and listened to voters like the Massachusetts worker who feared that “manufacturing breeds lords and Aristocrats, Poor men and slaves.” Paradoxically, Jackson strengthened the presidency, but used its powers to reduce government direction of economic activity. His party likewise celebrated strict construction and proclaimed that “the best government is that which governs least.” That slogan would later defend business interests from government regulation, but antebellum Democrats used it to inhibit state-sponsored development and preserve the republic. The connection between the Democratic Party and “big government” did not appear until the twentieth century. Generally speaking, Democrats were also more proslavery than Whigs. Small government and strict construction had clear implications for the Peculiar Institution, and Van Buren had explicitly hoped that his North-South alliance would silence its critics. As with the Jeffersonians, Jacksonian claims of white equality implied inequality for nonwhites, because rights for other races might dilute those of white men. A minority of northern Democrats did oppose slavery, usually on economic or political grounds. Their convictions mattered more as the sectional crisis worsened, but they mostly hid their feelings in Jackson’s heyday. When Democrats boasted of supporting “the people,” they universally meant white men. Most antislavery voters found a better home in the Whig Party. Some northern Whigs were committed abolitionists; most of the rest disliked slavery without supporting immediate abolition or racial equality. As a party, southern Whigs swore fidelity to slavery as much as Democrats, but slavery’s rare southern critics usually came from Whig ranks. Henry Clay, their perennial favorite, was a prosperous planter and large slaveholder, for example, but he began his career by calling for gradual emancipation in Kentucky and led the American Colonization Society for most of his life. By the same token, some Whigs could imagine permitting blacks some rights without conceding full equality, such as voting rights with a property requirement. Going further, northern Whigs clearly sympathized with evangelical reforms, including antislavery. Democrats were likewise stronger supporters of western expansion. Jefferson had welcomed the opportunity to purchase Louisiana and Jackson seized Indian land avidly, while Democratic racism favored Indian Removal and the growth of slave territory. In the 1840s, Democrats wanted to fight for Texas, California, and Oregon, and a Democratic journalist coined the phrase “manifest destiny” to justify --- continental empire. By contrast, Whigs often resisted expansion. In part, strategists realized that the question of slavery in the new territories would split the party and damage their electoral prospects. More fundamentally, they tended to fear the wilderness as a source of disorder and barbarism, and preferred to improve the existing America instead of stretching it too far. Praising “the people” above the elites, Democrats learned the tricks of popular mobilization more quickly than the Whigs. Activists used eye-catching emblems like hickory poles and hickory leaves to symbolize Old Hickory’s party, and excited their supporters with barbecues, music, and mesmerizing oratory. Committed volunteers and party professionals organized county, district, and state conventions to choose nominees and drum up support, and senior officials used patronage and government contracts to enforce the conventions’ decisions. Party members claimed that conventions were more democratic than private bargaining, but they also learned new forms of elitism by manipulating outcomes to suit themselves. Many Whigs despised partisanship for undermining republican independence, and adopted campaign stunts and party discipline very reluctantly. As the Whigs of Fayetteville demonstrated, however, they swallowed their doubts when nothing else would win elections. As both parties intensified their electioneering efforts, interest in national politics soared among ordinary voters. Only about one out every four white men had cast a ballot in the presidential election of 1824, but the number more than doubled in the partisan excitement of 1828. By the presidential election of 1840, voter participation had risen to a remarkable 78 percent of the eligible voters, and with a few exceptions, it remained in that range until the twentieth century. Economic interests affected political choices without entirely controlling them. The richest Americans were mostly Whigs, but the party won its most votes where the Market Revolution had improved opportunities for all citizens. Whigs endorsed evangelical virtues such as temperance, thrift, hard work, and piety, and often embraced the moral reforms inspired by the Second Great Awakening. By contrast, Democrats preferred personal liberty and often resented the reformers’ efforts to close saloons or send them to church. Free blacks voted Whig when they could, and Democrats enrolled vast numbers of Irish and German immigrants. Democrats were also popular among farmers, artisans, and urban workingmen who feared that economic change could end their opportunities and independence. In the Upper South, Democrats usually controlled the tidewater regions, where --- conservative planters feared the reach of government power, but the Whigs were strong in the upland regions where internal improvements were popular and plantations were scarce. Conditions were often the reverse in the Lower South, where extremely wealthy planters in the Black Belt admired Whig ideas on banking and the economy while yeomen in the hill country embraced the egalitarian slogans of the Democrats. The specific complexion of the Second Party System varied from state to state and constantly threatened to break down, but it held together for a pivotal generation and fulfilled Van Buren’s desire to bind “the planters of the South and the plain Republicans of the north.” As long as the Whigs and Democrats of one section thought they had more in common with distant fellow party members than with all southerners or northerners, they were not likely to put sectional interests before the concerns of their parties. The Second Party System thus promoted national unity by debating the issues raised by the Market Revolution instead of the far more divisive issue of slavery. The parties likewise cemented public opinion and mass voting as the only paths to national political power, even when they manipulated public opinion and practiced a new elitism once in office. ### THE AFTERMATH Biddle’s recession did not last long, for the number of pet banks increased and expanded lending to counter contraction by the Bank of the United States. Whigs continued to protest, but the pet banks kept the government deposits and the federal charter of the Bank duly expired in 1836. Biddle’s bank remained in business with a new charter from Pennsylvania, but its economic power had seriously diminished. The economy expanded rapidly in the Bank War’s aftermath. Crop prices rebounded, land speculation resumed, and paper money poured from unreliable wildcat banks. Whigs assumed that irresponsible pet banks loaned the government’s money too freely, while Democrats blamed Whig bankers for the profligate “Flush Times.” In fact, banks lent more because changes in the flow of international trade allowed American banks to import more Mexican silver, which then supported more lending, but few Americans understood these details. They interpreted the “Flush Times” by their own experience and scrambled to benefit as best they could. In 1836, prosperity and Jackson’s frugality allowed the United States to pay off its federal debt for the only time in its history. The nullifi- --- cation settlement made tariff levels politically untouchable, so with no debt to repay, a surplus built up in the Treasury. Congress distributed this surplus to the states, and most invested their share in banks and internal improvements, sometimes devoting the profits to public education. The same bill expanded the number of pet banks to almost 90, dramatically increasing the difficulty of supervising their custody of the public funds. The resulting burst of new loans and construction projects further stimulated the business boom, much to the president’s disquiet. To cool speculation and promote a metallic currency, Jackson issued an executive order, the Specie Circular, in 1836 that required gold or silver for the purchase of public lands. The circular angered speculators and Whigs cursed the president for another interference with the nation’s currency, but paper money remained popular and the “Flush Times” roared on. As the aging and ailing Jackson approached the end of his second term, he copied the example of George Washington and issued an earnest farewell address. In it, the president warned against sectional strife and government overreach, but focused on the lessons of the Bank War. He denounced all banks for encouraging excessive borrowing with a get-rich-quick spirit that corroded popular virtue. Sudden demands for repayment would inevitably follow, he warned, leading to panic, foreclosures, and worthless paper for wage earners. If allowed, banks would attempt to control the government as the Bank of the United States had done, and once more threaten the republic. The solution, Jackson believed, was to unite “the planter, the farmer, the mechanic, and the laborer,” or those he called “the great body of the people ... the bone and sinew of the country,” against “the moneyed interest” and “the multitude of corporations with exclusive privileges.” It was one of the most explicit appeals to class conflict ever heard in mainstream American politics. Without saying so in public, Jackson bequeathed this endless struggle to the Democratic Party, led by his loyal lieutenant and handpicked successor, Martin Van Buren. ## Outside the Party Fold Many Americans of the 1830s did not think of the Whigs or Democrats as natural or inevitable. Dissidents challenged and resisted the mainstream parties, offered alternatives, and tried to supplant them. Three of the most powerful challenges came from the remarkable anti-Masonic movement of the late 1820s and early 1830s, the Work- --- ingmen’s movement of the same period, and the steadily mounting slavery conflict. These movements responded to the same pressures that produced the major parties, but none gained the same success in the short term. Their records illustrate the many influences on Jacksonian politics and the power of the mainstream parties to silence or absorb their critics. ### THE “BLESSED SPIRIT” OF ANTI-MASONRY The Masonic order developed as a benevolent fraternity in eighteenth-century Europe, serving as something like a rationalist church for Enlightenment deists that offered secret rituals and an optimistic faith in human improvement to its all-male membership. Masonic lodges spread into late colonial America, enrolling distinguished patriots like George Washington and Benjamin Franklin, and sending impressively costumed dignitaries to ceremonies like the laying of cornerstones. The order grew rapidly after independence, possibly numbering 100,000 in the 1820s. Lawyers, judges, and officeholders flocked to Masonry, and it also attracted many mobile men who enjoyed the food, drink, and camaraderie they could always find in lodges. Members hoped that fellow Masons would help them in business, and nonmembers sometimes worried that the secret order gave its members unfair advantages in the market’s topsy-turvy scuffle for success. These suspicions boiled over when William Morgan, a disgruntled former Mason and unemployed stoneworker from Batavia, New York, suddenly went missing in September 1826. Morgan was jailed when he threatened to reveal Masonry’s secrets, and then whisked away by carriage and never seen again. Many suspected that vengeful Masons had murdered the hapless artisan and conspired to conceal their crime. All over western New York, Masons seemed implicated as sheriffs refused to investigate, grand juries refused to indict, and judges let suspects off with guilty pleas to minor offenses. Equally dominated by Masons and Martin Van Buren’s Democrats, the state legislature ignored all complaints. Masonic stonewalling fed anti-Masonic activism. Over the summer of 1827, local meetings denounced the alleged conspiracy and Masonic officeholders. Continued frustration led to a statewide convention in 1828 that warned of a secret conspiracy to obstruct justice, suppress liberty, and even overthrow the republic. The Anti-Masons then turned to politics themselves, nominating their own presidential candidate in --- 1828 and threatening Democrats and National Republicans throughout the Northeast. Their gubernatorial candidates took 45 percent of Pennsylvania’s vote in 1829 and 45 percent of New York’s in 1830, and carried Vermont between 1831 and 1834. Gathering in the United States’ first national political party convention, Anti-Masons nominated another presidential candidate in 1832, campaigned throughout the Northeast, and actually carried Vermont. Anti-Masonry had clearly transcended protests over Morgan’s disappearance to reflect the features of other contemporary movements. It originated in the Burned-Over District just as the Second Great Awakening caught fire, and spread like the revivals in regions of dislocation and anxiety. Activists denounced the secret machinations of the supposed Masonic aristocracy just as Democrats condemned the Bank of the United States and blamed its conspiratorial elite for dangerous and uncontrolled economic forces. Unlike Jacksonians, however, the Anti-Masons also feared the Masons’ nonsectarian quasi-church, their distaste for evangelical religion, and their fondness for a friendly drink. Whatever they had in common, Anti-Masons would not mix with Democrats, not simply because Jackson was a Mason and New York Democrats ignored their concerns, but because their evangelical moralism conflicted with the Jacksonians’ freewheeling machismo. The Anti-Masons succeeded too well, for all but 48 of New York’s 507 lodges disbanded in the next decade, and state membership dropped from 20,000 to 3,000. Active Masons had to leave churches, pulpits, jury rolls, and elected offices. When the order collapsed, what was the need for a party? Pragmatic politicians like New York’s Thurlow Weed and Pennsylvania’s Thaddeus Stevens soon recruited most Anti-Masons for the nascent Whigs. By 1838, the “blessed spirit” was virtually defunct, but its electoral base and crusading energy had become vital components of northern Whiggery. ## THE RISE OF THE WORKINGMEN The Market Revolution bore especially hard on urban artisans. Even outside the early factories, putting-out methods cheapened their skills and undermined their hopes for economic independence. Many struggled with unemployment and survived on the labor of their wives and children. The poorest workers endured real suffering, and the more fortunate knew that misery was as close as the next serious ill- --- ness or economic downturn. Even in good times, workingmen complained that contempt for manual labor had undermined republican equality. In the words of a Massachusetts writer, “The laboring classes in our country, in consequence of the inroads and usurpations of the wealthy and powerful, have for years been sinking in the scale of