and their behavior. A Boston firebrand declared in 1774 that “the colonists are by the law of nature free born, as indeed all men are, white or black.” Even Virginia aristocrat Arthur Lee agreed. “Freedom is unquestionably the birthright of all mankind,” he wrote to the *Virginia Gazette* in 1767, “of Africans as well as Europeans.” Freedom-loving slaveholders drew bitter charges of hypocrisy. “Why is it that we hear the loudest *yelps* for liberty from the drivers of negroes?” mocked English literary lion Samuel Johnson, and black and white Americans raised the same question. “Blush ye pretended votaries for freedom! ye trifling patriots!” cried John Allen, a Baptist minister from Massachusetts. “[You] are making a mockery of your profession by trampling on the sacred natural rights and privileges of Africans.” African-born poet Phillis Wheatley of Massachusetts insisted, “In every human Breast, God has implanted a Principle, which we call love of Freedom.” Writing to Native American minister Samson Occom in 1774, she acidly remarked, “How well the cry for Liberty, and the reverse Disposition for the exercise of oppressive Power --- over others agree ... does not require the Penetration of a Philosopher to determine." Spurred at first by religious faith and Enlightenment principles, vocal opposition to slavery as an institution had slowly emerged in eighteenth-century America and Europe. Puritan judge Samuel Sewall had denounced slavery in an early pamphlet of 1700. French Enlightenment philosopher Baron Charles-Louis de Montesquieu called slavery contrary to natural law in *The Spirit of the Laws* (1748), and Adam Smith of the Scottish Enlightenment called it backward in his *Theory of Moral Sentiments* (1759). Eccentric Quaker Benjamin Lay scolded Pennsylvania Friends for the sin of slaveholding in the 1740s. Fellow Quakers John Woolman and Anthony Benezet took up the cause in the following decade, leading the Society of Friends to ban slaveholding by its members in 1774. Without freeing his own five slaves, Benjamin Franklin endorsed their views and joined Benezet’s Society for the Relief of Free Negroes Unlawfully Held in Bondage, America’s first abolition society, and eventually served as its president. In London, a small group of Quaker and Anglican reformers created the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade in 1787, and France’s first abolition society, the Société des Amis des Noirs, appeared the following year. Enslaved Africans in Massachusetts sought their own freedom in a rash of successful lawsuits dating from the 1770s. In 1773, Boston slaves filed the first known petition for complete abolition. They described themselves as “discreet, sober, honest, and industrious,” as well as “virtuous and religious,” but owing to their bondage (and quoting from Psalm 49), “neither they, nor their Children to all Generations, shall ever be able to do, or to possess and enjoy any Thing, no, not even Life itself, but in a Manner as the Beasts that perish.” A year later, a similar group protested that they were unjustly “held in the bowels of a free and Christian country” and “deprived of every thing that hath a tendency to make life even tolerable.” The abolition movement would not become widespread until after American independence, but African Americans would not allow the campaign for liberty to stop at the color line. ## The Conflict Escalates Though Americans continued to stress their loyalty, pamphlets, speeches, and mob violence did break into armed rebellion. Boston --- radicals destroyed a valuable cargo of the British East India Company, and Parliament retaliated by revoking many powers of self-government in Massachusetts. When other assemblies protested, their governors dismissed them, and many Americans predicted that colonial self-rule was disappearing. They responded by creating alternate governments, from local committees of safety to the Continental Congress, that protected themselves by gathering arms. Serious fighting broke out when royal troops tried to seize such weapons from Concord, Massachusetts. Without yet declaring independence, Americans faced full-scale war. ### THE BOSTON TEA PARTY AND THE COERCIVE ACTS Protests of the tea tax eventually faltered, and Americans either paid it or smuggled tea from Holland. Tensions exploded again, however, when Parliament tried to help the powerful East India Company. The Tea Act of 1773 gave the company a monopoly on the sale of tea in America and, by cutting out middlemen, allowed it to undersell the smugglers. Lord North hoped that Americans would pay more taxes by drinking the cheaper legal tea. The Treasury, the company, and the customers would all benefit, and no one would complain but the smugglers. His lordship was mistaken. In Philadelphia, New York, Charles Town, and virtually every other port, the Sons of Liberty reemerged to tar and feather any merchant who accepted taxed tea from the East India Company. Most captains of ships carrying tea turned back from American harbors before risking their safety and their employers’ property. In Boston, however, Massachusetts-born Thomas Hutchinson had become the new governor, and the tea was consigned to his relatives. A proud and sensitive man, Hutchinson resolved to honor the king’s trust, protect his family, and defeat the radicals who had leveled his house in the Stamp Act riots. When three tea ships slipped inside Boston Harbor in November 1773, he would not let them leave without paying the hated duty. For three weeks, crowds met almost daily at the Old South Church to hear fiery denunciations of the ministry’s horrid scheme. At nightfall on December 16, 1773, a crowd burst out of the church and headed for Griffin’s Wharf. Crudely disguised as Indians, they swarmed aboard the ships and dumped tea worth £11,000 into Boston Harbor. To make sure no one acted for personal gain, vigilant guards enforced the tra- --- ditional rules for crowd actions of this kind: they took nothing but tea, they made sure it was thoroughly destroyed, they prevented anyone from helping himself to a handful, and they even swept up afterward. Overawed by the crowd, neither the ships’ crews nor the king’s troops lifted a finger to resist. King George, Lord North, and Parliament all demanded harsh punishment for the Boston Tea Party. Under the Coercive Acts of the spring of 1774, the port of Boston would remain closed until Massachusetts paid for the drowned tea; town meetings were suspended; an appointed council supplanted Massachusetts’s elected upper house; any British official charged with a capital crime in the colonies—one committed while suppressing protests, for example—was promised an English trial; and the army could lodge its soldiers in private homes. General Thomas Gage, commander of British forces in America, replaced Thomas Hutchinson as Massachusetts’s governor, with full authority to suppress disorder with his troops. Dubbed the Intolerable Acts by furious colonists, the Coercive Acts did not subdue Massachusetts, but convinced other Americans that all their representative governments were at risk. They were almost equally alarmed by the Quebec Act, an unrelated piece of legislation that established a nonelected government for the former New France and protected its Catholic Church. It also fixed Quebec’s southern boundary at the Ohio River, nullifying the claims of Virginia, Massachusetts, and Connecticut. The Quebec Act respected the customs of French Canadians, but frightened American Protestants with the specter of encroaching tyranny and papism, and outranged colonists who thought they had fought the Seven Years’ War to obtain the Ohio Valley for themselves. They quickly associated the Quebec Act with the other Intolerable Acts and demanded their immediate repeal. ### THE FIRST CONTINENTAL CONGRESS Like the Stamp Act, the Coercive Acts inspired American leaders to call an intercolonial meeting to plan common action. In September 1774, the Continental Congress assembled in Philadelphia with representatives from all the mainland colonies from New Hampshire to South Carolina. The 55 delegates included such luminaries as John and Samuel Adams, the cousins from Massachusetts, George Washington and Patrick Henry from Virginia, James Wilson and John Dickinson of Pennsylvania, and Roger Sherman of Connecticut. In its final reso- --- lutions, Congress declared that the Coercive Acts violated their rights as British subjects and ought not to be obeyed. To enforce this position, the delegates adopted an agreement they called the Continental Association, which renounced all British imports—including slaves—and threatened to block exports as well until the repeal of the Coercive Acts. The Association also called for local, elected committees to inspect all merchants and customhouses to detect and denounce violations of the agreement. Ominously, Congress sent representatives to Europe seeking money and arms. More theoretically, Congress resolved that Parliament had no right to legislate for the colonies at all, but agreed to respect the Navigation Acts voluntarily. They also pledged their continued loyalty to the king, but petitioned him to seek repeal of the Coercive Acts and other restrictions of their liberties. Uncertain of its next steps, the Continental Congress adjourned after six weeks and promised to reassemble the following May. Enforcing the Continental Association with elected committees unleashed more popular activity than Congress may have anticipated. Local communities chose as many as 7,000 committee members, many of them ranking far lower in the social scale than those who customarily held colonial office. These committees did not hesitate to use public humiliation and intimidation to get results. In Massachusetts, crowds shut down courts rather than submit to restrictions on provincial self-government imposed by the Coercive Acts. The Pennsylvania militia became the leading political force in Philadelphia, and calls for greater political equality increasingly accompanied demands for liberty. Conservative leaders increasingly worried that inciting popular protests had been a mistake. In the words of William Bull, lieutenant governor of South Carolina, “Men of property begin at length to see that ... the people ... have discovered their own strength and importance, and are not now so easily governed by their former leaders.” As imperial conflict deepened, Whig leaders began to realize that restoring an acceptable form of British authority might be unattainable, so an independent government led by American gentry would be far better than no government at all. Without entirely realizing it, delegates to the First Continental Congress had begun to act as the shadow of a national government, adopting the equivalent of laws (e.g., the nonimportation agreements), reaching out to foreign governments, negotiating with the king and Parliament, and even authorizing local bodies to carry out its decisions. The structure of royal authority began to crumble. Six --- governors had tried to prevent the appointment of delegates to the Continental Congress by disbanding their constitutional assemblies, only to see extralegal provincial congresses take their places. With a larger and more representative number of delegates than the old assemblies, the provincial congresses quickly made themselves the de facto governments of their respective provinces, approving the Continental Association and arranging for local enforcement committees. When surviving royal assemblies continued to resist the Intolerable Acts, governors closed them as well and unauthorized provincial congresses took their places. Congresses and local gatherings outdid one another in sending donations of food to beleaguered Boston, agreeing that, as a Philadelphia meeting put it, “our brethren at Boston [are] suffering in the common cause of America.” Wherever possible, the congresses also took charge of public supplies of gunpowder and other weapons, and the Massachusetts Provincial Congress called for companies of minutemen to begin training to defend the public liberties at a minute’s warning. ### LEXINGTON TO VIRGINIA These measures enraged the governors, especially General Thomas Gage of Massachusetts. Over the winter and early spring of 1775, Gage felt increasingly isolated on Boston’s slender peninsula as the reach of royal authority dwindled to the range of his own guns. To regain the upper hand, Gage decided to send troops to nearby Concord to arrest leaders of the Massachusetts Provincial Congress and destroy their munitions. His secret plans leaked, however, and when 800 redcoats crossed the Charles River on the night of April 18, 1775, Paul Revere, a leading Boston silversmith, and his companion William Dawes galloped ahead to rouse the countryside. Alerted by the messengers, about 70 minutemen from the town of Lexington gathered on their village green before dawn. They only intended to demonstrate their opposition by standing in arms on the roadside, and they started to obey when the approaching commander ordered them to disperse. Suddenly, in the dim light and tense confusion, an unknown person fired, and the British company followed with a couple of well-aimed volleys. The minutemen got off a few shots, but 8 of them fell dead; 10 others and an Englishman were wounded before the Americans broke for cover. As blood soaked into the Lexington common, the infantry cheered, --- re-formed their ranks, and resumed the march to Concord. There they fired on more minutemen, but they had lost the element of surprise and failed to find the powder or the politicians they wanted. Returning to Boston empty-handed, they faced even more trouble as minutemen from the surrounding towns launched continual ambushes from roadside trees, fences, and stone walls. British soldiers were virtually invincible on an open battlefield, but this way of fighting seemed savage, cowardly, and indefensible to them. The close of day left 273 British regulars and about 95 Americans dead or wounded. Gage was now trapped in Boston. From all around New England, 15,000 militiamen quickly gathered on surrounding hills. A small force commanded by Colonel Ethan Allen captured the British outpost at Fort Ticonderoga on Lake Champlain and hauled its captured cannon into place around the city. On June 17, 1775, Gage tried to break this siege by ordering his men to capture a crudely fortified installation on top of Breed’s Hill on the opposite side of the Charles River. In the misnamed Battle of Bunker Hill, British troops charged three times against the withering fire of their entrenched opponents, but did not capture the summit until the Americans had exhausted their ammunition. Of the 2,500 British soldiers involved in the battle, almost 50 percent were killed or wounded. As fighting broke out in New England, southern slaves mounted their fight for independence by deserting their masters and, with hopes of freedom, offering their services to the British. Facing the collapse of royal authority in November 1775, John Murray, the Earl of Dunmore and last royal governor of Virginia, took a fateful step: he issued a proclamation that offered freedom to all slaves and indentured servants who would escape rebellious masters and fight for the Crown. According to Thomas Jefferson, the prospect of a slave revolt “raised our country to a perfect frenzy.” Between 800 and 1,000 blacks eventually enrolled in Dunmore’s Ethiopian Regiment, with uniforms bearing the motto “Liberty to Slaves.” As many as 30 percent of the runaways were women and children, and eight belonged to Peyton Randolph, Speaker of the House of Burgesses and future president of the Continental Congress. The Ethiopian Regiment soon fought Whig forces “with the intrepidity of lions” at the Battle of Great Bridge, but many then succumbed to virulent smallpox that festered in Britain’s Chesapeake fleet. Despite this tragic reprieve, fear and outrage over Dunmore’s tactic deeply disturbed white southerners and convinced many that reconciliation was both dangerous and hopeless, but British --- service attracted even more slaves when the war turned decisively southward after 1779. # Decision for Independence The Second Continental Congress combined policies of war and peace, creating an American army headed by George Washington while still petitioning the king for a constitutional settlement. As war preparations continued on both sides, Thomas Paine’s hard-hitting *Common Sense* appeared, mocking the idea of kingship and dismissing the remaining arguments for reconciliation. As Paine’s arguments sank in, one assembly after another instructed its delegates to vote for separation. Congress finally adopted Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776. The Declaration’s fervent language has inspired and challenged Americans ever since. ### THE SECOND CONTINENTAL CONGRESS The Second Continental Congress assembled in Philadelphia in May 1775, three weeks after the Concord fight. Its members faced an entirely different situation than their predecessors had the previous autumn, for the earlier body had merely coordinated resistance to the Intolerable Acts, but the second faced outright war. In its first major decision, Congress embraced the impromptu gathering of militia units around Boston and proclaimed them the Continental Army. Emphasizing intercolonial solidarity, it gave the army’s command to George Washington. The 43-year-old Virginian had military experience, but more important was his air of calm authority and his remarkable ability to inspire trust from almost everybody. Convinced that all North Americans must be as unhappy with British rule as they were, the delegates sent a force to “free” Quebec, but French Canadians failed to respond and the foray failed disastrously. Needing money, Congress sent emissaries to Europe to beg assistance and also ordered the printing of $2 million in paper bills, though it lacked the means to back them up with either coinage or taxation. It also sought Indian allies and undertook to regulate the Indian trade. By organizing an army, launching an invasion, sending out diplomats, issuing currency, and conducting Indian affairs, the Second Continental Congress was already acting like a sovereign national government in the summer of 1775, though all but a handful of delegates still insisted they rejected the goal of independence. --- In a final bid for imperial unity, Joseph Galloway, a delegate from Pennsylvania who later became a Loyalist, proposed parallel legislatures for Britain and America under a common king. His idea resembled Benjamin Franklin’s Albany Plan of Union and the future British Commonwealth, but it strained against conventional beliefs in an undivided sovereign, or ultimate authority in government, and no one showed much interest. In effect, Franklin’s radical concept of 1754 had become the conservative compromise of 1775. Instead of seeking a new structure, Congress sent the king the Olive Branch Petition, calling again for the loosely jointed empire of 1763. Noting Americans’ actions instead of their words, King George refused to receive the Olive Branch Petition and proclaimed that the colonies had broken into outright rebellion and were no longer under his protection. Lacking an army of sufficient size, his ministers hired mercenaries from the German principality of Hesse and continued their plans to reduce the American colonies by force. ### COMMON SENSE Sentiment for independence began to crystalize in January 1776, with the appearance of an inflammatory pamphlet entitled *Common Sense*. Its author was Thomas Paine, a hard-pressed English radical and former artisan who arrived in Philadelphia in 1774 after numerous personal and professional failures at home. The imperial crisis gave Paine a new identity as a freelance revolutionary, and he went on to distinguish himself in both the American and French Revolutions. Unlike earlier pamphleteers, Paine did not cite philosophers or theorists but drew his arguments from the Bible and the “common sense” of ordinary literate Americans. Upholding popular demands for political equality as well as liberty, Paine implicitly asserted that ordinary people could judge their institutions by the rules of reason as well as European philosophers. *Common Sense* ridiculed the “balanced” government of king, Lords, and Commons, and denied that the king’s authority came from God. In Paine’s view, Old Testament kingship violated the covenant between God and Israel, and the monarchy founded by William the Conqueror in 1066 was no better. “A French bastard landing with an armed Banditti, and establishing himself king of England against the consent of the natives, is in plain terms a very paltry rascally original,” he sneered. “It certainly hath no divinity in it.” Continuing, Paine attacked hereditary power itself as “an insult and an imposition on posterity. For all --- men being originally equals," he reasoned, "no one by *birth* could have a right to set up his own family in perpetual preference to all others." And how could a return to the system of 1763 atone for the suffering inflicted at Lexington and Concord? Instead, Paine called on his adopted countrymen to reject "the hardened, sullen tempered Pharaoh of England for ever; and disdain the wretch, that with the pretended title of **FATHER OF HIS PEOPLE** can unfeelingly hear of their slaughter and composedly sleep with their blood upon his soul." He thus called boldly for an American republic, or elected government without a king, and included a proposed constitution. *Common Sense* closed by predicting a world-historical destiny for the new nation. Freedom was disappearing throughout the world, he claimed. "O! receive the fugitive," Paine begged his readers, "and prepare in time an asylum for mankind." *Common Sense* sold as many as 120,000 copies in three months. Paine’s strong language shocked readers who were more accustomed to respectful political discourse, but to those who snapped it up, *Common Sense* seemed to break the psychological bonds that still tied Americans to the idea of kingship. When he read the pamphlet, and heard simultaneously about Britain’s destruction of coastal towns in Maine and Virginia, George Washington was ready to put reservations about style and decorum to the side. "A few more of such flaming arguments as were exhibited [in the burning] of Falmouth and Norfolk, added to the sound doctrine and unanswerable reasoning contained in the pamphlet