Beecher and reconciled them to religious disestablishment. Once a fervent opponent, Beecher finally decided that the end of state-funded churches was *“the best thing that ever happened to the State of Connecticut”* because “it threw [the churches] wholly on their own resources and on God.” Religious coercion, he realized, was as ineffective in America’s new democratic culture as other discarded symbols of elite status and moral authority. “By voluntary efforts, societies, missions, and revivals,” he concluded, ministers “exert a deeper influence than ever they could by queues [i.e., an old-fashioned hair style], and shoe-buckles, and cocked hats, and gold-headed canes.” ### EVANGELICAL REFORM Influenced by urgent revivalism, some reformers came to see the moderate and church-focused efforts of the Benevolent Empire as halfhearted and inadequate. Just as evangelicals required converts to re- --- nounce their sins completely and immediately, reformers of the 1820s and 1830s increasingly demanded a more radical “perfectionist” or “immediatist” approach to reform that would bring the immediate perfection of American society. Many believed that if America improved itself enough, Christ would return to earth in the United States and begin his “millennium,” or thousand-year reign of perfect peace and justice preceding his Last Judgment. Finney boldly claimed that “if the Church will do all her duty, the millennium may come in this country in three years.” Inspired by such fervor and optimism, evangelical converts who might have become ministers became professional reformers instead and demanded new institutions to reclaim damaged souls. Working in this vein, reformer Samuel Gridley Howe tried to create alternative families or communities for the handicapped, especially in schools for the deaf. Dorothea Dix applied the same theory to the treatment of the mentally ill, and fought to bring the victims of madness out of chains, prisons, and attics to more comforting asylums. Temperance lecturers fought the evils of alcohol by demanding total abstinence instead of moderate drinking. Horace Mann, commissioner of education in Massachusetts, became a national leader in the cause of public schools and worked to make the state system of free public education a fundamental institution of democracy. More eccentric figures promised national redemption if Americans would only change their styles of clothing, take cold baths, and eat their vegetables. Practitioners of Spiritualism even claimed to communicate with the dead, using séances and mysterious rapping sounds from table tops. Broadly speaking, the reformers carried the ideals of the northern middle class to their logical conclusion, preaching that republican citizens must use their liberty for personal and social improvement instead of selfish indulgence or violent strife. In a time of rapid mobility and expansion, established authorities could not enforce these standards alone, so Americans must practice self-control to become self-governing in a literal sense. The ideal institution for instilling a self-governing conscience was the Christian family, inspired by a pious mother and led by a sober and hard-working father. Children brought up in such an environment would presumably carry their evangelical conscience wherever a turbulent economy or an expanding frontier might take them, but if it failed, an artificial family like the school, the asylum, the temperance society, or even the penitentiary might rescue them. Reformers adapted evangelical methods, using powerful language --- and images to break open the sinner’s stubborn heart and produce repentance. Once penitent, erring souls were urged to renounce their failing (such as alcohol), take action (for example, shun tipplers and their haunts, join a temperance society for support and sober friendship), and continue to improve themselves with hard work, self-reliance, self-discipline, frugality, punctuality, and respectability. In the case of temperance, reformers achieved a remarkable success, having persuaded Americans to reduce their consumption of alcohol from 7.1 gallons per person in 1830 to 1.8 gallons per person by 1845. When persuasion failed, some reformers imposed their goals by law, as when Maine banned the sale of alcohol in 1851. Twelve other states adopted the “Maine Law” before the Civil War, but few kept it for long. Without much government enforcement, the reform movement struggled to make evangelical values a national creed, sometimes battling uphill against divergent values among the working class, immigrants, frontier settlers, and slaveholders. As they fought, reformers freed public discourse from the exclusive control of white male leaders in church and state. While ministers and office seekers still pressed their claims, professional advocates and passionately committed volunteers argued for innumerable causes without political or denominational sponsorship. Women and African Americans joined national debates, even over their adversaries’ fiercest objections. New means of communication like cheap newspapers produced by steam-powered printing presses broadened the reach and lowered the cost of public debate, while an efficient Post Office and faster, cheaper transportation spread it to every corner of the country. Impressed by the strength of reform agitation, politicians tried to divert its energies or silence its disruptions, but they never entirely succeeded. Beginning in the antebellum era, voluntary associations of dedicated citizens became permanent fixtures in American public life. ### OPPOSING AND DEFENDING REFORM The reformers drew skepticism and even condemnation from various opponents. They often tried to bypass fathers and community leaders to make emotional appeals to vulnerable dependents like women and children, and defenders of traditional family and community hierarchies naturally resented these efforts. The reform movement could appear intolerant and overbearing to outsiders, particularly in cam --- paigns to enforce observance of the Christian Sabbath or to ban strong drink. Americans who celebrated the absolute freedom of every white man hated restraints like temperance laws (or even temperance lectures) and other curbs on liberty or personal choice. Immigrants and Catholics had their own reasons for distrusting reformers. The Puritan tradition had long opposed Catholicism, and Federalists were suspicious of foreign subversion. Irish and German newcomers were the first major contingent of Catholic immigrants to the United States, and they often voted for Jeffersonians and their successors. Native-born Americans often blamed Catholic immigrants for social problems such as poverty, crime, illiteracy, and alcohol abuse. Zealous Protestants commonly believed that Catholic dogma could silence the individual’s conscience, and accused the church of subverting reform objectives. Some Protestant reformers concluded that social ills, immigration, and Catholicism were multiple aspects of the same underlying problem. They filled classrooms and penitentiaries with Protestant tracts and Bible translations while more-secular leaders carried nativist views into politics and argued that Catholics and immigrants should not hold public office. Targeted Americans naturally resented these campaigns. Catholics and immigrants never welcomed evangelical interference, and few disapproved of moderate drinking. Reformers’ efforts to turn the public schools into evangelical bastions incensed Catholic leaders, so they created parochial schools as alternatives. Workers hated campaigns by evangelical employers against public amusements like saloons, theaters, and dance halls, believing that their bosses were less interested in saving souls than time and money. Baffled by this resistance, Protestant advocates assumed that tippling workers were drenched in sin while Catholics favored ignorance and superstition, so they simply redoubled their efforts. Fueled by these controversies, antebellum reform efforts often carried a distinct edge of class animosity and religious and ethnic intolerance. But though they valued self-restraint, reformers never saw themselves as tyrannical busybodies, capitalist police, or enemies of freedom. In their minds, they were trying to perfect the world by inspiring individuals to escape from deadly traps like immorality, poverty, ignorance, addiction, and infirmity, and bringing them to salvation, or freedom from the bondage of sin. If self-indulgence or traditional hierarchies supported these obstacles to true liberty, they must give way to the promise of the millennium. Reformers were sometimes de- --- luded and self-righteous but they were usually sincere, and they often struggled as hard against evils within themselves or their families as they did in the world at large. Even as they fought to make the middle-class values of the urban and small-town North the creed of the entire nation, the antebellum reformers established a continuing national tradition of collective efforts to solve community problems. # The Assault on Slavery As reformers made progress against ills like intemperance, they increasingly saw the moral blindness and cruelty of slavery as the greatest and most intractable obstacles to American improvement. Like other advocates, the opponents of slavery began by calling for moderate, gradual improvements, but shifted to calls for immediate abolition as perfectionist ideals grew increasingly compelling. The abolitionist movement met angry opposition in the North and violent resistance in the South, but activists persisted and their movement slowly grew. ## Early Efforts For most of human history, slavery existed without controversy as one of many kinds of subordination in a world where few people were truly free. As eighteenth-century Britons increasingly boasted of their liberty, however, a few religious leaders began to question the ownership of human beings. Foremost among them were members of the Religious Society of Friends, who believed that God had given everyone an "inner light" to see his truth. Quaker founder George Fox had therefore insisted to his followers that “Christ ... shed his blood for [Africans] as well as for you; and hath enlightened them as well as he hath enlightened you.” An early Pennsylvania meeting asked, “Have these Negroes not as much right to fight for their freedom as you have to keep them slaves?” The same meeting denounced all forms of slavekeeping. Individual Quakers like Anthony Benezet and John Woolman wrote and traveled widely in the early eighteenth century, urging their fellow Friends to liberate their slaves. The Philadelphia Yearly Meeting heeded their message in 1758 and excluded all buyers and sellers of slaves from its leadership. Ordinary Quakers began to abandon the institution altogether, and Philadelphia Quakers formed the world’s first antislavery society in 1775. Similar groups spread across the North and even into the Upper South in subsequent decades. --- Opposition to slavery spread as the principles of the Enlightenment and the American Revolution underscored the hypocrisy of calling for liberty while holding others in bondage. With few slaves already, northern states gradually gave up the practice after independence, and Congress banned the Atlantic slave trade in 1808. Further progress then began to falter. Where slaves were numerous, slave owners clung to their valuable property and many whites feared a large free black population. Certain that the two races could never live peacefully together, they insisted that slavery could not end until the former slaves left America. In 1816, a group of leading gentlemen organized the American Colonization Society, a component of the Benevolent Empire that proposed to settle free blacks in Liberia, a settlement the society founded in Africa for this purpose. The colonization movement attracted a mixed group of supporters, including political leaders like Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, Henry Clay, and Bushrod Washington (the first president’s nephew), moderate reformers who hoped to encourage emancipation, evangelicals who hoped the migrants would convert the Africans to Christianity, and slaveholders who wanted to rid the country of free blacks. Colonization even interested some black leaders like Paul Cuffee, the sea captain from New Bedford, Massachusetts, who transported 38 people of color between 1810 and 1820 to Sierra Leone, a British colony like Liberia. African Methodist Episcopal bishop Richard Allen and businessman James Forten supported the movement, but other African Americans insisted that their own claims to American equality were as good as anyone’s, and condemned colonization as a plot to strengthen slavery by expelling free blacks. Experience proved, moreover, that the hope of ending slavery by colonization was utterly impractical, for the Colonization Society could never send more than a couple of hundred emigrants to Africa per year, while the slave population grew by 50,000 annually. Right down to the administration of Abraham Lincoln, however, moderate white politicians continued to endorse colonization as the answer to the slavery problem, even while more committed activists looked for another solution. ### BLACK ABOLITIONISTS African Americans hardly kept silent while white Americans debated their fate. New England slaves petitioned their state governments for --- liberty in the American Revolution, claiming “a natural and inalienable right to that freedom which the Great parent of the Universe hath bestowed equally on all mankind.” Slavery collapsed in Massachusetts after Elizabeth Freeman and Quok Walker sued for their freedom and won, citing provisions of the Revolutionary state constitution. African Americans watched carefully when slaves in the sugar colony of Saint Domingue invoked the egalitarian principles of the French Revolution to launch their own revolt in 1791, as did the enslaved blacksmith Gabriel in his unsuccessful 1800 revolt in Richmond, Virginia. Partly from fear of the Saint Domingue example, antislavery idealism began to falter after the first wave of post-Revolutionary emancipations. Southern states banned voluntary manumissions and gradual abolition laws did not extend below Pennsylvania, but African Americans did not relax their struggles. In 1822, free carpenter Denmark Vesey reportedly organized an extensive conspiracy in Charleston, South Carolina, which was only averted when a participant leaked the secret. Seven years later, in 1829, David Walker, a free black man of Boston, dramatically publicized the radical critique of slavery with his blistering pamphlet *Walker’s Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World.* He argued that slavery must be abolished everywhere, that whites had no right to send blacks “back” to Africa, and that slaves should reclaim their freedom by force if necessary. The *Appeal* was especially frightening when free black seamen slipped it into southern ports, where slaves and free blacks gathered secretly to read and discuss it. Southern authorities quickly put a price on Walker’s head and banned the circulation of such “incendiary” literature. Walker died soon afterward, but other black abolitionists continued the struggle. Many participated actively in northern abolition societies, both racially mixed and all-black. Maryland runaway Frederick Douglass became one of the country’s most renowned antislavery orators after gaining his freedom in the 1840s. Physician and editor Martin Delany and Presbyterian minister Henry Highland Garnet both promoted national conventions of black leaders and revived the idea of black migration to Africa when they decided that whites would never tolerate black equality in America. Black women formed auxiliaries to male abolition societies, and beginning with the free black women of Salem, Massachusetts, they built all-female societies to fight discrimination along with slavery itself. “Conductor” Harriet Tubman took direct action for freedom by entering the South 13 times after her own escape to rescue some 70 slaves through the clandestine network --- known as the Underground Railroad. Once the Civil War began, black men and women streamed south to aid newly freed slaves with relief work, education, and health care. ## IMMEDIATISM Influenced by black abolitionists and frustrated by the ineffectual methods of the American Colonization Society, a small but deeply committed number of white antislavery radicals rejected the goal of ending slavery gradually. They demanded immediate abolition instead, without compensating masters for lost property (few thought of compensating the slaves), and no deportation of the freed people. The best-known radical abolitionist was William Lloyd Garrison, a white Massachusetts reformer who had worked for temperance and colonization before free blacks in Baltimore converted him to immediatism. On January 1, 1831, Garrison published the first issue of his newspaper, the *Liberator*, denouncing slavery as a monstrous evil and demanding its immediate abolition. He also condemned racial prejudice and discrimination and insisted on complete racial equality. Garrison renounced the use of force and insisted that his only weapon would be "moral suasion," but he swore that "I will not equivocate—I will not excuse—I will not retreat a single inch—AND I WILL BE HEARD." Founding the American Anti-Slavery Society in 1833, Garrison and his followers welcomed black and female members and shocked moderates by demanding equality for women as well as African Americans. Garrison’s harsh rhetoric and uncompromising style angered most white Americans, but won support from free blacks, who composed three-quarters of the *Liberator*’s early subscribers, and leading black abolitionists such as Frederick Douglass. Borrowing revivalist methods, the American Anti-Slavery Society raised money from sympathizers like Lewis and Arthur Tappan, who were brothers and pious and reform-minded New York business partners, and employed traveling lecturers who toured the North to denounce slavery, organize local chapters, and circulate petitions. One of the most active lecturers was Theodore Dwight Weld, who had led antislavery discussions among his fellow students at Lane Seminary until President Lyman Beecher expelled the participants for stirring controversy. Weld and the other lecturers endured rotten eggs and stoning as they crisscrossed the free states in the mid-1830s, explaining the evils of slavery and establishing local chapters of the society. --- Abolitionists aroused furious opposition. When Nat Turner’s bloody slave revolt broke out in Virginia only months after the first appearance of the *Liberator*, southerners blamed Garrison for the carnage and the state of Georgia offered a $5,000 reward for his arrest. Even in the North, many established leaders and ordinary citizens hated abolitionists as extreme versions of other unpopular reformers, who flouted white male authority to preach radical equality to women, children, and blacks. Some northern politicians courted southern votes with furious attacks on abolitionism, and many voters in New York and other centers of the cotton trade shared their sentiments. Mobs dragged Garrison through Boston in a noose and, in 1837, killed abolitionist editor Elijah P. Lovejoy for defending his press in Alton, Illinois. Black neighborhoods in northern cities were frequently the targets of racist attacks. Abolitionism kept spreading despite persecution and eventually outgrew the leadership of any single individual. The movement split when Garrison continued to insist on gender equality and “nonresistance,” renouncing of all forms of coercion, including self-defense, laws, government, and voting. Quoting the biblical prophet Isaiah, he condemned the US Constitution as a “covenant with death and an agreement with hell” for its proslavery features. Adopting the slogan “No union with slaveholders,” Garrison urged sympathizers to “come out” of all churches and other institutions that refused to condemn slavery wholeheartedly and even called on the North to preserve its moral purity by seceding from the Union. ### ANTISLAVERY POLITICS More-pragmatic abolitionists declined to abandon politics and insisted that the true spirit of the Constitution supported liberty, regardless of its proslavery compromises. They confronted slave owners in Congress by electing antislavery representatives from sympathetic northern districts and petitioning Congress to end slavery in the nation’s capital. These petitions so enraged southern congressmen that they imposed a “gag rule” to silence them in 1836, a clear violation of freedom of speech and the right of petition. Frederick Douglass gave personal testimony on the horrors of plantation life and raised funds for the aid of fellow fugitives, finally splitting with Garrison over the issue of nonresistance. Antislavery politicians first took their case to the voters with the Liberty Party, a small splinter group formed in 1840, which --- broadened into the Free Soil Party in 1848. With the founding of the Republican Party in 1854, antislavery politicians created the organization that elected President Abraham Lincoln in 1860, directly leading to disunion and the Civil War. Abolitionism never commanded a northern white majority before the Civil War, but dislike of slavery kept spreading in the 1840s and 1850s. With telling effect, orators asked how a system that seemed to require the gagging and murder of white citizens could ever be compatible with American liberty. Influenced by such questions, even white northerners who could not support immediate emancipation grew increasingly resentful of slavery’s growth and expansion. ## Women and Reform As the Market Revolution stimulated the growth of an urban middle class, the “cult of domesticity” glorified women’s roles as mothers and homemakers. Under the doctrine of “separate spheres,” men supposedly ruled the rough world of politics and the marketplace, while “true women” turned their homes into gentle and redemptive spaces to nurture children and men. Even in the middle class, however, women were never disconnected from a wider world. They were very active in the Second Great Awakening, composed most of its first converts, and actively worked for their churches. Building on these experiences, female activists threw themselves into the whole spectrum of evangelical reform associations. There they joined a “public sphere” larger than their private lives but mostly distinct from the business and political arenas that still belonged to men. Eventually, their experience in this public sphere would inspire some women to demand full equality of the sexes, including the right to vote and hold office. ### FROM DOMESTICITY TO THE PUBLIC SPHERE Even the most conservative men conceded the importance of women to the Second Great Awakening. Women almost always outnumbered men on church rolls, both before and after seasons of revival, and preachers counted on women for help in redeeming their men. “Who can so successfully wield the instrument of influence than women?” asked the Utica (New York) Tract Society in 1823, cautiously adding that “a sensible woman *who keeps her proper place* . . . may exert *in her own sphere,* almost any degree of influence that she pleases” (italics --- added). Women often led in inviting evangelists to their communities, and Charles Grandison Finney reciprocated by encouraging women to pray in each other’s homes