to become specialized artisans or house servants, or to supervise other slaves, but most male and female plantation workers were field hands. Sea Island masters assigned work according to the “task system,” designating each hand’s daily work and allowing those who finished early to use the extra time as they wished. In practice, most tasked slaves had to use their “free” time to support themselves by hunting, fishing, tending small gardens or livestock, or performing odd jobs for pay. Some Sea Island slaves used their earnings to acquire property that custom — not the law — recognized as their own. In most parts of the South, however, masters strictly regimented slave labor from dawn to dark, and sometimes longer. On the typical cotton plantation, the master or overseer roused slaves by a bell or horn and marched them to the fields by daybreak. With a short break for breakfast and another for the midday meal, labor continued at a steady pace until sundown, weather permitting, with rest breaks timed to meet the needs of the work animals, not the people. Cotton planters improved productivity by substituting the “gang system” for tasks. Dividing their workforce into small groups, or “gangs,” typically led by a single slave “driver,” planters used competition and intense supervision to reach maximum output. Exacting masters knew exactly how much plowing or picking to expect from each worker, sometimes rewarding those who overperformed, but certainly punishing those who fell short. By steadily raising their daily work requirements and routinely whipping slaves who did not meet them, Deep South planters forced a phenomenal 361 percent increase in the amount of cotton picked per slave per day between 1811 and 1860. Though improved plant varieties may have contributed to the increase, enslaved men and women clearly had to pick faster and faster, picking with both hands, for example, just to avoid the lash. “No matter how fatigued and weary he may be — no matter how much he longs --- for sleep and rest—a slave never approaches the gin-house with his basket of cotton but with fear,” recalled Solomon Northup, once enslaved in Louisiana. “If it falls short in weight . . . he knows he must suffer.” Most field hands got Sundays off and a holiday between Christmas and New Year’s Day, but house servants were always on duty. Free farmers worked hard too, but the unrelenting compulsion of the gang system was the key to slavery’s profitability. Its regimentation made slaves significantly more productive than free workers and gave masters a marked economic advantage over yeomen and small slaveholders. In other words, “to work like a slave” in the Old South was very hard labor indeed. The steadily rising price of slaves reminded most masters to keep their chattels healthy and productive, and even Edward Covey gave his workers enough to eat. Written instructions to overseers usually prescribed a peck of ground corn, three or four pounds of salt pork, and a serving of molasses every week for “full hands,” or able-bodied men, and proportionately less for “half hands,” or less productive women and children. These rations supplied enough calories for working adults, but like the diets of other laboring Americans, the rations lacked the proper amounts of key vitamins and nutrients. Even under the gang system, most slaves could supplement this diet with gardens or extra work in off-hours, and masters might pay them for surplus vegetables, game, and poultry. Slaves’ clothes and houses were likewise crude, and Frederick Douglass remembered suffering from the cold, but sensible masters issued enough clothing for winter protection. Some plantations produced their own shoes and garments, but it was increasingly more efficient to purchase such items from northern manufacturers who made “negro goods” for the southern market. Most plantation slave families lived in the “quarters,” a cluster of small, dirt-floored log cabins not far from the master’s “big house,” but single slaves on small farms probably found living space in odd corners of the master’s own dwelling. Slave labor was relatively inflexible, for slaves had to be supported and supervised whether working or not. Owners of unneeded slaves could rent them to others, usually for one-year terms that began on New Year’s Day. Edward Covey hired Frederick Douglass on this basis. Some skilled or urban slaves “hired their own time” by paying their masters a fixed weekly sum for the privilege of living and working independently. Venture Smith worked this way in colonial Connecticut, and Frederick Douglass hired his time in Baltimore after leaving --- Edward Covey. Though convenient for individual masters, governments discouraged or forbade this practice as injurious to discipline. As one slaveholder explained to northern traveler Frederick Law Olmsted, hired slaves “got a habit of roaming about and *taking care of themselves.*” The result, said a governor of Louisiana, was that slaves gained “liberties and privileges totally inconsistent with their proper condition and good government.” ### SLAVE FAMILIES The laws of the slave states did not recognize slave marriages, but most masters encouraged slaves to form marriage-like unions and to live in families. African Americans certainly welcomed this opportunity, and masters thought it discouraged escape. Most slave mothers had their first children about the age of 21, so couples presumably formed shortly before that. Christian slaves could be married by a minister, but most masters conducted a simple ceremony themselves that climaxed when the couple jumped over a broomstick together. Slaves might be required to find spouses on their own plantations, but masters normally permitted “abroad” marriages between men and women on neighboring farms, and they allowed husbands to spend Saturday nights and Sundays with their wives and children. Even when slaves were married in church, ministers generally omitted the binding phrase “till death do you part,” for about 15 percent of all slave couples were parted by sale. Sexual abuse was a particularly distressing aspect of slavery. Its precise extent is impossible to recover, but ex-slaves mentioned it repeatedly in their published recollections, white women often complained about it in divorce petitions, and the census of 1860 described 13 percent of all African Americans as “mulattoes.” The open sale of beautiful, well-dressed “fancy girls,” often of racially mixed ancestry, was a matter of common notoriety in cities like Charleston and New Orleans. Slave owners who impregnated their female slaves added more slaves to their holdings, and white and black women were mostly powerless to stop them. South Carolina’s Mary Boykin Chesnut confined her rage to her diary, but significantly blamed black women more than white men. “Under slavery, we live surrounded by prostitutes,” she seethed. “God forgive us, but ours is a monstrous system, a wrong and an iniquity . . . ! Any lady is ready to tell you who is the father of all the mulatto children in everybody’s household but her own. Those, she seems to think, drop from the clouds.” --- Some masters showered privileges on their concubines and freed and educated their children. Others practiced brutal rapes or more subtle forms of coercion, for by law, forcing a slave was not a crime. Certainly the notion of "consensual" sex between a white man and a slave woman was highly complicated by the woman’s almost complete inability to refuse. Sexual abuse degraded black women, humiliated black men, embittered white women, and coarsened white men, yet it was an obvious and widespread aspect of the slave experience. Masters valued slave births and instructed overseers to protect the health of pregnant women, but hard labor pressed heavily on recent and expectant mothers. Slave babies suffered low birth weights and higher than average mortality, and their mothers experienced serious health problems as well, but the total slave population still grew steadily. Mothers nursed their infants in the fields, and an elderly slave cared for older children until they were ready for light tasks such as weeding at about age seven or eight. The work got heavier every year until young people were deemed ready for full field labor in their mid-teens. Slave children did not go to school, and most states made it a crime to teach a slave to read or write. ### SLAVE DISCIPLINE Masters understood that slavery depended on force. “It is like ‘casting pearls before swine’ to try to *persuade* a negro to work,” declared one Arkansas planter. “He must be *made* to work, and should always be given to understand that if he fails to perform his duty he will be punished for it.” Even so, writers on slave discipline recommended a system of rewards as well. “I contend that the surest and best method of managing negroes is to love them,” wrote one Georgia planter with no apparent irony, and he also observed that kindness could be as useful in training slaves as it is in horses. Whatever they thought of the comparison, diligent slaves could receive extra food, clothing, money, alcohol, or time off. A successful harvest season could bring a party or a feast but poor performance might cancel it. Like employers firing free workers, masters could sell their resisting slaves, and the threat of sale away from family and friends could be a powerful form of discipline, but unlike free workers who could not eat without a job, slaves who were sold remained an expense until the new master could make them work. Corporal punishment therefore underpinned persuasion, and the whip cracked on virtually every plantation. “The whip was evidently --- in constant use," reported a *New York Times* correspondent when he visited one Deep South plantation. A Virginian explained why: "A great deal of whipping is not necessary; *some* is." Accepting this reality, the laws of the slave states generally forbade the deliberate murder of a slave but otherwise gave masters a free hand. "It is a pity that agreeable to the nature of things Slavery and Tyranny must go together," sighed a Carolina planter. "There is no such thing as having an obedient and useful Slave, without the exercise of undue and tyrannical authority." Most masters thought that 15 or 20 lashes with a heavy rawhide strap were enough to "correct" an offender, but punishments of 100 lashes were not uncommon and massive sentences of 500 lashes or more were not unheard of. Other penalties could include the use of jails, stocks, chains, and other heavy and painful devices. Slave narratives and travelers’ reports repeatedly confirmed cases of extreme brutality. "Often I have witnessed negroes dragged, without regard to age or sex, to the public whipping post," wrote a northern visitor to North Carolina, "and flogged with the cowskin until the ground beneath is dyed with the blood of the sufferer." Some masters were pathologically cruel. Others struggled with their tempers. The Reverend Charles Pettigrew, for example, admitted that "to manage negroes without the exercise of too much passion, is next to an impossibility." Others indulged in petty tyrannies, like the mistress who always spat in the cooking pots to keep her kitchen slaves from sampling the leftovers. While thousands tried to operate within their own rules of decency, the law made no distinction between them and their sadistic neighbors, for as North Carolina chief justice Thomas Ruffin put it, "The power of the master must be absolute to render the submission of the slave perfect." ### SLAVE RESISTANCE Captured Africans resisted their enslavement from their first moments of captivity, and African Americans did likewise. By the first decades of the nineteenth century, however, most American blacks had been born in slavery and the opportunities for complete escape were rare. Instead, rebellious slaves did what they could to make their lives easier inside the system of bondage, to disrupt their work routines, and to challenge the relentless psychological pressures of enslavement. State laws defined slaves as "chattels personal," or moveable property like animals, tools, and furniture. Paradoxically, the law also recognized slaves as human because it forbade their murder and punished --- their crimes. The most profound insults of slavery involved treating humans as things, so anything a slave did to claim humanity could qualify as resistance. Slaves used their own families and communities to remind each other of their common dignity, to cherish children, to honor the elderly, to share the love of husbands and wives. When these family ties were broken by sale, slaves leaned on adopted relationships of "uncle," "auntie," "brother," or "sister." Slaves retained a rich cultural heritage of African-inspired music and folklore, and they used their art to convey their deepest hopes and frustrations. Influenced by the Second Great Awakening, thousands of slaves converted to Christianity and used this aspect of white culture to condemn the moral pretensions of whites themselves. Most slave Christians joined Baptist or Methodist churches dominated by whites, but many also seized every opportunity for secret prayer meetings in the woods or the quarters, where they could express their own longings for spiritual and temporal liberation. Besides art, religion, and kinship, the most obvious form of slave resistance was a collective refusal to work harder than necessary. Owners and overseers constantly complained that slaves broke tools, damaged crops, injured work animals, and failed to pay attention. Some blamed black stupidity, but shrewder owners guessed the truth. The slave, one admitted, can "pretend to more ignorance than he possesses . . . [which] serves as an apology for awkwardness and neglect of duty." Slaves could also be adept at feigning illnesses or stealing food and other valuables. Despite the prevalence of such "day-to-day" resistance, however, masters still wrung more labor from slaves than northern farmers got from hired hands. Escape was the most common form of overt resistance. Runaways' autobiographies celebrated permanent flight to Canada or the North, but such exploits were rarely feasible. Maps and traveling information were scarce, and local governments employed vigilant white patrols, or "paterollers," to ride the roads at night and demand written passes from all blacks found absent from their masters' property. Like the young Frederick Douglass, aggrieved slaves more commonly took to the woods temporarily, to avoid a sale, to escape an unbearable punishment, or to visit a distant family. Runaways could even negotiate the terms of their return by sending messages through other slaves. Such bargaining undermined all the principles of slavery, but harassed masters frequently compromised for the sake of results. Violence was the most drastic form of slave resistance. Frederick Douglass pointed to his fistfight with Edward Covey as the psychologi --- cal turning point that inspired him to seize control of his life. Masters and overseers sometimes died in such outbursts, and some also fell to arson, poison, or midnight suffocation. Punishment for murder was swift and severe, but it could not quiet owners’ fears of what the most docile slaves might contemplate in secret. In the Caribbean and South America, the enslaved population was dense enough to support repeated revolts. Of those, the Haitian Revolution was the best known and most successful. North American slaves seldom took such risks, probably because well-armed whites outnumbered them by at least two to one or more in most districts. Four planned or actual uprisings offer proof, however, that the possibility of slave revolt never disappeared. In 1811, as many as 200 slaves led by the Haitian-born driver Charles Deslondes rose on the so-called German Coast of Louisiana, on the Mississippi’s east bank. For two days, the rebels marched toward New Orleans, burning plantations on their way, until they were stopped by a white militia. Vengeful whites took almost 100 black lives in the aftermath; Deslondes himself was burned alive. A decade earlier, in 1800, a Richmond blacksmith named Gabriel enlisted many followers in a plot to seize the city and its arsenal, kill the leading whites, and bring in allies from the countryside. In 1822, white Charlestonians shuddered at reports that a free black seaman named Denmark Vesey formed a similar plan in Charleston with the help of “Gullah Jack,” an Angolan shaman whose familiarity with traditional African religion won support among the country slaves of the Sea Islands. In both cases, rumors of a planned revolt brought torture and execution to dozens of suspects. In 1831, Nat Turner, a slave preacher of Southampton County, Virginia, became convinced that God would free his people if they only struck the first blow. Turner and his companions attacked a series of surrounding farms and quickly took about 60 whites’ lives before an aroused militia crushed them. Like the others, Turner’s revolt was followed by mass executions of suspected participants, some by the forms of law and others by simple lynching. Slave revolts were not common in the antebellum South, but the possibility of violence terrified whites and left them susceptible to panicky rumors and vengeful excesses. ## The South’s Free Society Slave society left a profound mark on southern whites as well as blacks. The slaveholders themselves were a minority of the population, but slave ownership gave them powerful economic, political, and --- social privileges. A few slaveholding spokesmen defended the resulting inequality among whites, but racial privileges gave all white men a form of equal superiority that usually masked class differences. Sexual abuse of black women and obsessions over racial purity put a unique burden on white women as the only possible mothers of legitimate white children. White women of the upper classes occupied an elaborate pedestal, rigidly barred from public life but extravagantly praised for the “feminine” virtues. Racism burdened the lives of the South’s tiny free black population and kept most of them poor and fearful of re-enslavement. ### THE MASTERS Slaveholders were a declining minority in the South, falling from a third of the white population in 1790 to a quarter in 1860. The average slaveholding increased in the same period, so slaves were concentrating in fewer hands as their prices increased. Historians have used the ownership of 20 slaves or more to distinguish between small slaveholders and planters. The distinction is somewhat arbitrary, but it roughly separates farmers who mostly supervised their slaves from those who worked beside them in the fields. Defined in this way, planter families constituted only 12 percent of all slave-owning households. Planters with more than 50 slaves often hired overseers for daily management and devoted their time to business, leisure, or public service. Less than 1 percent of white households owned over 100 slaves in 1860, creating a planter “aristocracy” of about 2,300 families. At the other end of the scale, nearly half of all slaveholders owned no more than five slaves. Planters were the richest and most prestigious men in the South. The region’s elite also included the merchants who shipped its staple crops from ports like Charleston and New Orleans. In county seats and market towns, the lawyers, doctors, merchants, and ministers who served the planters also belonged to the upper class. Southern planters and professionals held a disproportionate share of political power, monopolizing governorships and congressional seats and dominating the state assemblies. In the climactic year of 1860, for example, the proportion of slaveholders in soon-to-be Confederate state legislatures ranged from 86 and 82 percent in North and South Carolina, respectively, to 42 percent in Arkansas, while the proportion of planters varied between 55 percent in South Carolina and 13 percent in Arkansas. And the “nonslaveholders” counted in these figures included --- planters’ sons who expected to inherit the family estate. Planters were a small proportion of the total population, but they set the tone of public life and exercised great cultural influence as well as political and economic power. Elite families could enjoy palatial homes and luxurious living standards, especially where the plantation system was old and well-established. Brick Georgian mansions graced the landscape of ancient Virginia counties, while newer regions sported plantation homes in the popular Greek revival style with wide verandas and tall white columns. Ostentation triumphed along the lower Mississippi, where Louisiana sugar planter John Andrews built his 75-room mansion Belle Grove in the late 1850s to overshadow neighboring Nottoway with its 64 rooms. Such displays were exceptional, however. Most of the Lower South was only a generation away from the frontier in 1860, and pretensions to ancestral polish had little basis in reality, no matter how wealthy a family might be. Some of the most ambitious southwestern planters were so intent on building up their fortunes that they ignored physical comforts and installed their families in houses made of logs or unpainted wooden boards. Small planters in many parts of the South did not live much differently from ordinary farmers, as journalist Frederick Law Olmsted discovered in a trip through the Red River country of Louisiana in the late 1850s. “The house was a small square log cabin, with a broad open shed or piazza in front, and a chimney, made of sticks and mud, leaning against one end,” the traveler reported of a typical dwelling. “A smaller detached cabin, twenty feet in the rear, was used for a kitchen. . . . About the house was a large yard, in which were two or three China trees, and two fine Cherokee roses; half a dozen hounds; several negro babies, turkeys and chickens, and a pet sow, teaching a fine litter of pigs how to root and wallow. . . . The house had but one door and no window, nor was there a pane of glass on the plantation.” The owner’s family lived in a single room, 16 feet by 20, but they owned at least 20 slaves. The reporter probably found an extreme example, but among ordinary slaveholders simple quarters were far more common than pillared mansions. ### THE MISTRESSES Slaveholders took special pride in the place of privileged women in their society. No political gathering or Fourth of July celebration was complete without an eloquent toast to “the fair,” and plantation men --- boasted that the southern lady was so well-honored that feminist complaints would never be heard in Dixie. "A Southern matron is