Douglass," a thrilling antislavery orator and abolitionist celebrity. His first autobiography, *Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave, Written by Himself*, became a contemporary best seller and a classic account of a slave’s struggle for freedom, identity, and manhood. As the most famous and respected black man in the United States, Douglass became a persistent influence on Abraham Lincoln, pushing the Civil War president to embrace the cause of emancipation. Over the rest of his career, Douglass was the preeminent public advocate for black civil rights, a bold supporter of women’s suffrage, the US minister to Haiti, and the author of two more autobiographies. As he put it in the final words of his *Narrative*, Douglass spent the rest of his life “in pleading the cause of my brethren.” The battle between Edward Covey and Frederick (Bailey) Douglass exemplified the social experience of the antebellum South in several ways. Slavery rested on violence, actual or potential, and on collaboration between common white men like Edward Covey and Bailey’s more affluent owner, Thomas Auld. Frederick Douglass’s furious battle demonstrated that the love of freedom did not die, no matter how subdued a slave might appear. In their hearts, slave owners knew that superficial acquiescence was not the same as true submission, and they charged their slaves with perpetual deception. “So deceitful is the Negro that as far as my own experience extends I could never in a single instance decipher his character,” a Georgia master admitted after emancipation. “We planters could never get at the truth.” Slavery’s fierce antagonisms and pervasive influence gave a distinct character to the economy, society, and government of the antebellum South. Slave owners wielded pervasive power over the economy, politics, and culture of the region, even though most southerners were neither slaves nor masters, but whites who lived on small farms like those of the rural North and Midwest. Even in the midst of slavery, these southerners insisted on white liberty and equality, and the planter elite could not ignore them. Masters’ efforts to control their --- slaves and to dominate nonslaveholders without appearing tyrannical suffused the public and private life of the region. The antebellum North and South were similar in many ways, but the institution of slavery made them just different enough to generate serious sectional discord. Managing these tensions became a fundamental task of national leaders in the antebellum years. Eventually the task overwhelmed them, and slave labor and free labor societies went to war. ## Southern Contours In 1815, when Andrew Jackson triumphed at the Battle of New Orleans, the identity and physical dimensions of the American South were still emerging. France and Spain had claimed Louisiana for over a century, but it never flourished like the Atlantic colonies, and only a dozen years had passed since President Jefferson acquired it for the United States. The state of Louisiana had entered the Union just as the War of 1812 began, and it was still the only state south of Tennessee and west of the Appalachians when peace came. A handful of Spaniards held Florida, but Native Americans possessed much of the future Deep South. The South’s most populous and densely populated region was still the Chesapeake, where white settlement had begun 200 years before. By 1860, the territory that Jackson seized from the Spanish and the Indians and defended from the British had changed considerably. Most of the Native Americans had been expelled and their lands had turned into cotton plantations. The 15 slave states held 12 million Americans, nearly 40 percent of the total population, and slavery stretched from tiny Delaware to the frontier states of Texas and Missouri. Most important, the South in 1860 had emerged as a distinct American section with its own internal divisions, drawn together by a common commitment to slavery and a long political struggle to defend it. These differences played an important role in political controversy and the construction of southern identity, beginning in the era of Jackson’s victory and continuing through the secession crisis and the Civil War itself. ### THE UPPER SOUTH At least three major geographical divisions crisscrossed the southern landscape, powerfully contributing to regional diversity. The first divided the tidewater, low country, and river bottom land from the --- piedmont and similar upland districts. Plantation slavery thrived on the fertile soil of the lowlands, but the higher ground held more yeomen and small slaveholders. Beyond the piedmont, the mountainous portions of the South were even more isolated and usually unsuited for plantations. A second major division followed the Appalachian Mountains and separated the long-settled Southeast from the Southwest, sometimes called the Old Southwest, where Americans followed French and Spanish colonizers. The most important division separated the Upper South and its more diversified economy from the Lower South, or Deep South, dominated by cotton, rice, and sugar plantations. Though state lines never coincided exactly with agricultural regions, the Upper South roughly extended from the Ohio River and the Mason-Dixon line (between Maryland and Pennsylvania) through North Carolina, Tennessee, and Missouri, while the Deep South stretched southward from there to the Gulf of Mexico. Over the course of the eighteenth century, soil exhaustion and changing markets had led many planters in Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia to switch from tobacco to wheat and other crops that required fewer workers, and hopes rose that slavery might disappear from the Upper South as it had farther north. Some masters freed their slaves or allowed them to purchase their liberty, until free blacks outnumbered slaves in Delaware and the District of Columbia, and nearly did so in Maryland. Local societies to promote voluntary manumission dotted the region through the 1820s and support grew for the American Colonization Society. These conditions changed after the Lower South opened for settlement after 1815. Thousands of Upper South whites bid up the price of slaves when they migrated to the Southwest seeking fresh soils and new opportunities. A massive domestic slave trade sprang up, and the sale of surplus workers became an important source of income to cash-strapped masters. Support for emancipation likewise faltered, as slave sales restored the profitability of worn-out Chesapeake plantations. Some whites who remained in the Upper South experimented with manufacturing or agricultural reforms, but the region largely retained its traditional economy. Plantations grew tobacco, cotton, corn, wheat, and hemp, and pine forests still yielded naval stores. Small farmers in the up-country leaned toward self-sufficiency, but also hauled a small surplus to fall-line markets. Divisions between up-country and lowlands roiled the politics of the Upper South, as low country planters resisted yeoman demands for greater representation and state expen- --- ditures on internal improvements. As sectional tensions increased, family ties, slavery, and the importance of slave sales all tied the Upper South to the Deep South, while proximity and economic similarities drew it to the North. Together with its own internal divisions, these competing allegiances undermined sectional extremism and kept the Upper South’s future uncertain. ### THE COTTON KINGDOM In 1858, Senator James Henry Hammond of South Carolina popularized a memorable expression on the floor of the US Senate. While the North was reeling from the Panic of 1857, he boasted, the South remained unscathed and untouchable. “No, sir,” Hammond sneered, “you dare not make war on cotton. No power on earth dares make war upon it. Cotton is King.” Hammond was certainly right about the size and importance of the cotton crop. By the time he spoke, cotton cloth had become the world’s most important industrial product, and the United States was the leading supplier of raw cotton, producing about 70 percent of the annual harvest. Cotton was by far the most valuable US product, constituting at least half the value of total exports every year, with an annual value of at least $100 million by end of the 1850s. Wealth from the cotton crop not only built the mansions of the cotton planters; it filled the bank accounts of shippers, export merchants, bankers, and textile manufacturers, paid the salaries of their thousands of employees, and fostered the growth of the cities they lived in, both North and South. Economist Douglass C. North has concluded that cotton production was the largest single contributor to US economic growth in the antebellum era and laid the basis for America’s future economic power. African American slaves plowed, planted, hoed, picked, and “ginned” most of this valuable crop. While the Market Revolution propelled northern states toward industrialization and the commercial family farm, the same set of economic pressures brought an expansion of slavery in the southern states. Under the influence of expanding cotton production, the South remained what it had been in the eighteenth century: not merely a society with slaves in it but a thoroughgoing slave society in which the principle of human property dominated the economy, preoccupied the government, and underpinned the values and ideals of the white majority. The antebellum North and South had much in common, but the fundamental institutions of one --- section depended on freedom while their parallels in the other relied on slavery. That difference ultimately overwhelmed the similarities of North and South. The most significant economic event of the post-Revolutionary South had been the spread of a new variety of cotton to supply the booming textile industry of New England and Europe. Long-staple cotton grew long delicate fibers with smooth seeds that a pair of rollers could easily separate, but it would not grow outside the semitropical environment of the South Carolina and Georgia Sea Islands. Hardier upland, or short-staple, cotton flourished in the southern interior, but its short fibers clung stubbornly to its seeds, requiring a day's labor to prepare a single pound of lint for carding and spinning. Visiting a Georgia plantation in 1792, Connecticut tutor Eli Whitney overcame this difficulty by combining rollers with wire combs and a toothed cylinder that forcefully pulled out the seeds. Whitney’s engine, or “gin,” made a single worker 50 times as productive as before and inspired a host of imitators. The cultivation of upland cotton spread rapidly, and the Cotton Kingdom began to rise. The cotton gin made short-staple cotton a profitable crop from southern Virginia to eastern Texas. Cotton plantations spread from coastal districts to the up-country of South Carolina and Georgia, on to central Tennessee, and then south to the Gulf coast territory that Andrew Jackson had seized from the Creeks in the War of 1812. Jackson further expanded the Cotton Kingdom with two invasions of Florida, which pressured Spain to sell the province in 1819, and by seizing the remaining Indian territory when he became president in 1829. The new crop sparked a wave of emigration and land speculation, as thousands of whites abandoned worn-out acreage in Virginia and the Carolinas for the deep rich soils of the newly opened Southwest. “The Alabama Feaver rages here with great violence and has carried off vast numbers of our Citizens,” a sardonic North Carolinian observed in 1817. “Some of our oldest and most wealthy men are offering their possessions for sale and [are] desirous of removing to this new country.” Farmers could raise cotton with family labor but larger operations were more efficient, so slavery spread in cotton’s wake. Congress ended the African slave trade in 1808, but domestic traffic replaced it. Historian Michael Tadman has estimated that the transport of slaves from one region to another rose from 40,000 or 50,000 in the 1790s to 150,000 in the 1820s, and then as high as 250,000 in the 1830s and 1850s. Some migrating slaves moved with families and friends when --- Upper South masters transplanted whole communities to the Deep South. As many as 60 or 70 percent, however, were torn individually from their loved ones and delivered to professional slave dealers. The domestic slave trade profited buyers and sellers but tormented its victims, few of whom could ever see their families again. The Cotton Kingdom never displaced the other staples of the Deep South. Sea Island planters kept growing long-staple cotton for luxury fabrics, and rice plantations persisted nearby. In southern Louisiana, successful planters mastered the culture of sugarcane to amass huge fortunes and slave holdings. Sugar, rice, and Sea Island cotton laid the basis for some of the South’s largest fortunes, vast palatial mansions, and largest concentrations of slaves, but their special environmental requirements limited their growth and overall influence. ### THE SLAVE ECONOMY Economic historians have left little doubt that slavery was a profitable institution that was not in danger of internal collapse, especially after the spread of cotton cultivation. Slave prices hit their all-time high on the eve of the Civil War, a good indication of slave owners’ confidence in their economic prospects. With high cotton prices, planting was not only profitable but the safest and most prestigious activity a southern investor could pursue. Throughout the South, ambitious nonslaveholders like Edward Covey did not look for alternatives to slavery but hoped to gain land and slaves of their own. Men who made fortunes in business, medicine, or law likewise gained dignity and social standing with the purchase of slave plantations. Slavery produced short-term profits and painful long-term consequences. Considering the free population alone, the South’s per capita income actually exceeded the North’s, particularly in the Southwest where very wealthy planters skewed the averages. The average figures plunge, however, when slaves — the most deprived portion of the population — are counted in the comparison. Per capita incomes in the industrializing Northeast were more than twice those of the Southeast, moreover, and most observers who compared the “North” and the “South” were actually comparing these regions. Like many others, New York’s senator William H. Seward reported “exhausted soil, old and decaying towns, wretchedly-neglected roads, and, in every respect, an absence of enterprise and improvement” on his 1856 trip to Virginia. A few critical southerners agreed. Summarizing conventional --- wisdom, North Carolinian Daniel R. Goodloe wrote that "slavery affects the prosperity of the country by its tendency to degrade labor in the estimation of the poor and to engender pride in the rich; and as a consequence, to produce idleness and inattention to business in all." The South's economy was not all backward. Sizable cities dotted its periphery and funneled regional crops to distant markets. The largest was Baltimore, built on shipbuilding, manufacturing, and trade and holding over 200,000 inhabitants in 1860. The portions of Kentucky and Virginia (now West Virginia) that bordered the Ohio River interacted extensively with their northern neighbors, and cities like Louisville and St. Louis flourished with free labor. A few slave-operated cotton mills appeared at Upper South waterpower sites, and Richmond's Tredegar Iron Works produced weapons, rails, and locomotives with 900 free and enslaved workers. As early as the 1830s, the region's leaders called for more such developments and their numbers grew over time, but observers still complained that the Upper South's economy badly lagged behind the North's. The slave economy also contributed to northern growth. Cotton was the key raw material for cotton cloth, the most important product of early industrialization in the United States and Europe. The size of the US cotton crop rose from just over 3,000 bales (400–500 pounds each) in 1790 to 3.8 million bales in 1860, and the United States produced two-thirds of the world's supply. Cotton had been the most valuable American export since 1840, and British factories bought most of it. Southern planters profited from these sales, but so did the northern banks that financed the purchase and sale of the crop and often the purchase and sale of the enslaved workforce. Other beneficiaries included the northern owners of the railroads, steamboats, and merchant vessels that carried the cotton crop to market and across the sea, the northern insurance companies that underwrote it, the northern manufacturers who spun it into cloth, the northern farmers and manufacturers who sold food and supplies to the plantation system, and the millions of free northerners who worked for them, not to mention the millions of other Americans who did not handle cotton themselves but drew their livelihoods from those who did. The slaves who grew this cotton were valued at $3 billion in 1860, about 20 percent of all the wealth in the United States. The profits that northern businesses and individuals reaped from slave labor financed a substantial portion of the growth and income of the antebellum United States. --- In technical terms, the South "grew," because its wealth and income continued to increase, but did not "develop" as fast as the rest of the country, because its economic complexity and sophistication (and thus its capacity for future growth) did not improve at the same pace. In other words, while the South became wealthier, it lagged in such things as the growth of cities, construction of railroads, accumulation of banking capital, number of pupils in school, and levels of literacy. Development could lag in any farming region, but the rural regions in the Northeast and Midwest (or Old Northwest) prospered more than the slave states as the frontier receded. Did slavery impoverish the South by hampering economic development? Historians continue to debate this question. The South’s geography was not inherently agricultural, for some southern factories prospered using slaves, and industry grew even more when slavery ended. Even so, some planters actively discouraged industrialization because they feared that urban-dwelling factory slaves would become too independent, while free white factory workers might cast their votes for anti-slavery agitators. Louisiana sugar planter Samuel Walker expressed these attitudes in his diary in 1856. "Slavery is from its very nature eminently patriarchal and altogether agricultural," he concluded. "It does not thrive with master or slave when transplanted to cities, where is assembled large crowds of indigent and many unprincipled whites, especially where there are many foreigners to earn or steal subsistence." The slave South paid a social and political price for its choices. Limited industrialization slowed population growth, for immigrants shunned an economy where wage-paying jobs were scarce and tainted by resemblance to bondage. The states south of Pennsylvania contained 51.3 percent of Americans in 1790 (2 million out of 3.9 million) but only 38.9 percent in 1860 (12.2 million out of 31.4 million). As a result, southern representation in the House of Representatives steadily dwindled, from 46 percent of the seats in 1790 to 35 percent in 1860, despite protection by the Constitution’s three-fifths clause. Facing these realities, some southern leaders longed to combine slavery with progress, but their exhortations had limited effect. The slave states subsidized transportation technology to carry exports to market, but not to build cities or internal trade. Wary of expense and dubious of social uplift, southern states lagged far behind the North in establishing common schools and educating white children. Needing to keep their captive workers busy, planters saw little need for labor-saving machinery beyond the cotton gin and imported their farm tools --- from the North. Tellingly, Cyrus McCormick’s business did not thrive until he moved it from Virginia to Chicago, where it evolved into the International Harvester Company. Though factories using slaves enjoyed high rates of return, investors still hesitated to build them. For many, the plantation system was a way of life, not just a way to make a living. No smoky factory could produce the social and psychological satisfactions of a gentleman who surveyed his broad acres and fluffy white fields from the spacious veranda of a plantation “big house.” By reinforcing the system of slavery, the paradoxical effect of the Market Revolution in the South was to hinder its economic development until after emancipation. Slavery generated substantial incomes in the southern states, but failed to stimulate the technological complexity and sophistication that could feed more growth in the second half of the nineteenth century. # The Peculiar Institution White southerners called slavery their “Peculiar Institution,” not because they thought it strange but because it was uniquely theirs. Though slavery once existed throughout the Americas, the northern states and the former Spanish colonies abolished it after gaining independence. The slaves of Haiti threw off their chains in the world’s only successful slave revolution, Britain abolished slavery in its colonies in 1834, and France followed in 1848. African slavery survived in Cuba, Puerto Rico, Brazil, and a handful of smaller European colonies, but by 1830 if not earlier, the US South had become the most important slave society in a world based increasingly on free labor. ## WORKING LIKE A SLAVE The enslaved were about a third of the antebellum southern population. Most lived on plantations, defined as farms with 20 slaves or more, but no more than 10 percent lived on plantations with more than 100. Though conditions varied from region to region, the typical slave in 1860 probably lived on a farm with the owner’s family, perhaps an overseer, and about 30 or 40 other African Americans. First and foremost, slavery was a labor system, and slaves did virtually every kind of manual labor available, from skilled woodworking, iron making, and dressmaking, to cooking, cleaning, and childcare. As Frederick Douglass said of his year with Edward Covey, “We were --- worked fully up to the point of endurance. . . . It was never too hot or too cold; it could never rain, blow, hail, or snow too hard for us to work in the field. . . . The longest days were too short for him, and the shortest nights were too long for him.” Wealthy slave owners could afford to take a long view and attempt to keep their chattels healthy, but an ambitious renter like Edward Covey had little use for such pains. Men like Covey typically longed to make enough money to buy their own slaves, giving them even more reason to drive themselves and their rented workers without mercy. Large planters could allow a few men and women