as New Netherland, New York was otherwise emblematic of the seventeenth-century English empire. It was one of several proprietorships established by the Stuart Restoration, and filled a vital gap between the Chesapeake and New England. In an empire based increasingly on commerce, the Hudson River Valley provided bountiful food exports and a vital highway for the fur trade, but its diverse people were prone to quarreling. James II hated representative assemblies in both his kingdom and his colony, so he would not allow New York to elect a legislature like Virginia’s or Massachusetts’s, but his appointees had proved inept in the recent emergency and opened the way for Jacob Leisler’s coup. In the aftermath of the Glorious Revolution, a more successful imperial system would require enough central authority to maintain stability and protect the interests of empire, balanced by enough flexibility and popular consent to resolve disputes and maintain public support. It was a formula that eighteenth-century colonists and officials worked hard to establish, so incidents like Leisler’s execution would no longer be necessary. Like New York, most of the colonies that became the United States slowly took shape and found stability between the Restoration and the early eighteenth century. Several experienced disruptions, but most escaped political violence. Competition between rival empires spurred the colonies’ development, and imperial officials struggled constantly to control trade, but had to balance central control and commercial interests against popular expectations. Though repression ended Leisler’s Rebellion, representative assemblies in England’s other colonies gained central roles in imperial governance, bolstered by the results of the Glorious Revolution. The new empire would depend on the right combination of imperial requirements, colonial aspirations, and the realities of the American continent. --- # Rivals for America American colonial development always took place within the framework of Atlantic imperial competition. Eighteenth-century Spain claimed an immense empire stretching from California and Florida to the southern tip of South America. Its mines still yielded vast quantities of silver, but Spain’s economic and military might began to ebb in the early seventeenth century, allowing England, France, and Holland to advance by exchanging America’s products for Europe’s. With the right balance of trade, commercial countries could divert gold and silver from Spain’s treasury to their own. As hopes faded for the discovery of more mineral treasure in America, European statesmen became more and more excited by the possibilities of empires built on Atlantic trade. ## Spain and New Spain Spain claimed most of North and South America, though much of its territory was still in Native American hands. It divided this empire in quarters, each headed by a viceroy who represented the Spanish Crown and directed the governors of individual provinces. With its capital at Mexico City, the former Tenochtitlán, the viceroyalty of New Spain included all Spanish territory north of Panama. A large bureaucracy administered the affairs of its church and state, and the only elected bodies were local town councils, or *cabildos*. Spain’s American wealth was the envy of Europe, but precious metals actually weakened its economy. The Crown claimed one-fifth of all the silver from the colonies and designed its trade policies to protect this revenue from smugglers, pirates, and foreign enemies. Most of the remaining silver went to the nobility and some of it went to the church. Like the Crown, these recipients were anxious to protect their incomes and avoid risks, and they shunned direct involvement in business as socially degrading. Silver therefore crossed the Atlantic in closely guarded annual convoys and entered Spain through a single port (Seville first, Cadiz later), where a small guild of merchants held a trading monopoly. These policies did not stop smuggling, but they limited the growth of more innovative urban rivals. Once in Spain, silver paid for expensive armies and navies, the lifestyles of nobles and churchmen, and imported manufactures that undermined Spain’s own industries. Though Spain forbade direct foreign exports to its colonies, merchants evaded the barrier by bringing --- foreign goods to Spain before reshipping them to America. Foreigners also supplied most of the capital for this trade, leaving Spain and its empire economically dependent on other countries. Contemporaries remarked that “the cloth trade is England’s Indies,” because exchanging textiles for Spanish silver was an ideal path to riches. The economies of the Spanish colonies centered on mining or supplying the mines with necessities like food, livestock, and leather. If they did not own mines themselves, leading colonists raised these products, as well as sugar and tobacco, on large landed estates called haciendas. Some of their workers were African slaves, especially in the sugar districts, but most were Indians laboring under the encomienda, or tribute, system or struggling to repay debts that kept them in a state of semibondage called peonage. As in Spain itself, the focus on mines and haciendas discouraged economic diversity and self-sustaining development, and led to a society dominated by a small wealthy elite atop a mass of impoverished laborers. Hostage to the silver trade, the economy of Latin America depended on Spain just as Spain itself depended on Europe. Latin American society developed patterns of racial and ethnic diversity that sharply contrasted with those in the English colonies. Relatively few Spaniards came to America and many were single men who hoped to return to Spain. These men often had children with Indian or African women, creating a racially mixed population of *mestizos* (with white and Indian parents), *mulattos* (with white and African parents), and all combinations of their descendants. Free, mixed-race people took jobs that might otherwise have gone to poor or middling whites, and they became intermediaries between the white elite and the mass of slaves and Indians. Latin America became a society where light skin was a key to social rank, but with many gradations of color, power, and status between very dark and very light. In the English colonies, by contrast, wealthy whites extended a certain kind of equality to poor and middling whites while treating free people of color almost as badly as enslaved Africans. New Spain guarded its northern boundaries with a series of frontier outposts, beginning with San Agostino (St. Augustine) in 1565 and followed by New Mexico in 1598, nine years before the English came to Jamestown. Spanish settlements reached Texas in 1691, and finally California in 1769. The Spanish did not find gold or silver in these places, but used them to convert Indians while warding off enemies and preserving their claims against England, France, and (on the --- Pacific coast) Russia. When private settlers ventured to these distant outposts, their principal economic activity was cattle ranching and the export of hides and tallow. Missionary efforts were central to all these border settlements. Members of the religious orders, especially Franciscans, accompanied conquistadors wherever they went, and the government funded their efforts to bring Christianity and Hispanic culture to the Indians. The colonizers typically established themselves near an Indian community and offered it protection in exchange for work and Christian baptism. Participation was supposed to be voluntary, but the Spanish presence might provoke attacks from other Indians, disease was an ever-present menace, and Spanish animals could overrun fields and other food sources. Nearby Indians might thus have little choice but to enter the mission community. Once there, they were not allowed to leave or continue their traditional religions, but forced to practice Christianity and work under conditions of near slavery. Mistreatment and disease soon took their toll, and the population of border areas dropped as grimly as elsewhere. The most successful rebellion against the mission system erupted among the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico. Scattered in separate adobe villages along the Rio Grande Valley, the Pueblos had accepted the Spanish without much resistance between 1598 and 1680, while their numbers dropped from 60,000 to 17,000. A chain of events then drove them to fury, beginning with a prolonged drought that devastated crops and drew raids from neighboring Navahos and Apaches. Pueblos revived their traditional religion when Spanish soldiers and the Spanish God seemed equally powerless against these dangers. Determined to keep their converts, the Franciscans cracked down on “witchcraft” by whipping and hanging the offenders. One of these, a young man named Popé, struck back by organizing a rebellion in the summer of 1680, soon after Bacon’s Rebellion and Metacom’s War in the far-distant English colonies. Using series of knotted cords to count off the days, his recruits struck almost simultaneously in mid-August and quickly killed nearly 400 Spanish settlers and missionaries, while besieging most of the rest in the governor’s palace at Santa Fe. One band of survivors immediately retreated to the village of El Paso, then located on the south bank of the Rio Grande. Once the Santa Fe garrison surrendered, Indians allowed its members to join them. The victorious Pueblos destroyed all the signs of Spanish culture they could find, from churches and crosses to live- --- stock and fruit trees, and the Spanish did not attempt to return until 1692, after Popé’s death. A smaller revolt followed in 1697, until the warring parties struck a compromise in which the Pueblos tolerated the Spanish presence and ultimate authority in return for greater independence and religious toleration. The Spanish and Pueblos could then unite against their common enemies, the Navajos and Apaches. ### THE DUTCH AND NEW NETHERLAND The Netherlands was England’s closest economic competitor in the seventeenth century. The low-lying Dutch provinces on the North Sea had fallen to the Spanish Crown by conquest and marriage, but they outraged its Catholic monarchy by embracing Calvinism in the Reformation. Spanish efforts to crush Dutch Protestantism touched off a prolonged struggle for independence that made the disparate provinces a true nation. Fighting broke out in 1568 and continued sporadically for another 80 years, but the United Provinces of the Netherlands enjoyed de facto independence after 1585, with a republican government that practiced religious toleration. This generous policy not only made the United Provinces a refuge for dissident European Protestants, but it also brought the energy and talents of Sephardic Jews persecuted by Spain and Portugal. Seafaring skills, a shortage of land, and a weak nobility gave the Dutch a long trading tradition that encouraged economic independence and innovation. Expanding capitalism thus blended with religious and patriotic motives to inspire Dutch attacks on Spanish and Portuguese commerce, particularly after 1580, when the Dutch independence struggle overlapped with the union of the two Iberian kingdoms. Founded in 1602, the Dutch East India Company captured Portuguese trading posts in Africa, India, Ceylon, and Java, gained exclusive trading privileges in Japan, and established the colony that became South Africa. Founded in 1621, the Dutch West India Company seized Elmina on the Gold Coast, Caribbean islands and Surinam on the northern coast of South America, and coastal Brazil, where it briefly took over the sugar industry. The Dutch West India Company also founded New Netherland, North America’s first major mid-Atlantic colony, by settling 30 families there in 1624. Like the founders of New France, the company mostly sought furs, so it first ignored the excellent harbor at the mouth of the Hudson River in favor of Fort Orange, an upstream trading post at --- the present site of Albany. Two years later, a second group purchased Manhattan Island from the local Indians and established New Amsterdam as the capital of New Netherland. The price was 60 florins’ worth of trade goods, not the 24 dollars of legend, but the exact sum is virtually impossible to translate into a modern currency. As often happened, the Manhattan Indians probably thought they were renting the island, not selling it. To stabilize the fur trade, Dutch officials and the Five Nations of the Iroquois formed an alliance that promised mutual friendship and cooperation and recognized Iroquois dominance of the neighboring tribes. As European population grew, newcomers began building farms along the Hudson to Fort Orange, and beyond there to the Mohawk River outpost of Schenectady. To encourage more immigration without resorting to indentured servants or deported paupers and criminals as the English did, the Dutch made some very large Hudson Valley land grants that gave the owners certain rights of government and the title of patroon if they brought in 50 tenant families. Patroons could operate courts and collect rents and their own taxes, but their tenants escaped colonial taxes for 10 years. The largest of these, the manor, or patroonship, of Rensselaerwyck went to Kiliaen van Rensselaer in 1630, and contained approximately one million acres on both banks of the upper Hudson. In addition to collecting rents and administering justice, the patroons could require tenant labor on their roads and fences, appoint clergymen, and collect taxes to pay them. They did not always exercise these privileges, and many of the largest landholdings broke up after sale or inheritance in the eighteenth century. Other manorial families, including the van Rensselaers, established themselves as enduring rural aristocrats in the Hudson Valley. They attracted tenants by offering low rents on long leases, with the right to sell the improvements to their farms if and when they chose to move. The English continued patroonships and even created new ones when they took over New Netherland, and Rensselaerwyck survived until the early nineteenth century. The population of New Netherland was never wholly Dutch. The first 30 families were French speakers from what is now Belgium. New Englanders built Puritan townships on eastern Long Island. French Protestants, called Huguenots, fled persecution at home to found New Rochelle, and German refugees came from the Rhine Valley for similar reasons. New Netherland absorbed New Sweden in 1655, and Sephardic Jews arrived from Brazil when Portugal recaptured that colony --- and ended its religious freedom. The Dutch brought African slaves to their colony, and the Iroquois Indians traded there regularly. Manhattan residents spoke 18 different languages in the seventeenth century, more than any other town in North or South America. The Dutch Reformed Church was New Netherland’s legally established faith, but persecution was bad for business and other sects enjoyed de facto toleration. Commercial competition sparked three Anglo-Dutch wars in the seventeenth century, and New Netherland became a pawn in these conflicts. Coveting the fur trade, England seized New Netherland in 1664, lost it to the Dutch again in 1673, and finally regained it after the Third Anglo-Dutch War of 1674. Renaming its prize New York, England cemented its control of the entire Atlantic coastline from Maine to South Carolina. ### NEW FRANCE AND THE "MIDDLE GROUND" France became England’s most enduring rival for control of North America. The kingdom had suffered serious internal conflict during the Reformation, but the Huguenots did not prevail and Catholic France replaced Spain as the strongest and wealthiest realm in seventeenth-century Europe. In the era when Parliament won supremacy in England, French kings and their able ministers concentrated power in royal hands and used their authority to bring stability and prosperity. Like Spain, France became an absolute monarchy, where the king ruled by decree and individual subjects depended on traditions and intermediaries rather than legal safeguards to shield them from the central state. French glory reached its zenith under King Louis XIV, known as the Sun King for the splendor of his reign and his court at Versailles. Louis XIV fought a series of costly wars to assert his kingdom’s power and expand its boundaries to the Rhine, challenging most of the surrounding states, including England, for political and military supremacy. French expansion reached America when sixteenth-century voyages by Giovanni da Verrazzano and Jacques Cartier established France’s claims to the St. Lawrence River Valley. French fishermen had long taken codfish from the rich waters of the Grand Banks, just off the coasts of modern Newfoundland, dried their catches on neighboring islands, and traded for furs with nearby Indians. Building on this traffic, an expedition in 1600 established France’s first permanent North --- American settlement at the village of Tadoussac at the mouth of the St. Lawrence River. Farther upriver, Samuel de Champlain founded the city of Quebec in 1608. The colony of New France took shape along the St. Lawrence between the Atlantic and the Great Lakes, as French fur traders paddled their canoes ever higher up the waterways in search of skins. Jesuit priests frequently accompanied them, earnestly seeking to convert the Indians, and sometimes burning at the stake when their audiences proved unreceptive. Hearing of the Mississippi River from Indians living near the Great Lakes, Father Jacques Marquette and fur trader Louis Jolliet followed their portage across modern Wisconsin in 1673 and descended the Mississippi to the mouth of the Arkansas River before returning to New France. Robert de La Salle followed in 1682, traveling the length of the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico, claiming the lands it drained for France, and naming them Louisiana for its king. La Salle later hoped to found a settlement by ascending the river from its mouth, but in 1687, he died at the hands of his own colonists when he could not find the elusive channel. A permanent French presence on the Gulf began in 1699, followed by the city of New Orleans in 1718. Moving upstream, French colonists slowly built a chain of riverbank trading posts that tied Louisiana to New France. To counter the partnership of the Dutch and the Iroquois, and later the English, the Indians of the *pays d’en haut*, or “upper country,” of the St. Lawrence Valley allied with New France to protect their trade and to settle disputes. French, English, and Indian land claims would overlap in the triangle formed by the Ohio River, the Mississippi, and the Great Lakes, and spark bloody struggles for control of the Ohio country. The fur trade became very important for all its participants. French individuals and trading companies gained commercial profits. The government of New France collected revenue from the sale of trading licenses. More important, the government and the Indians used their trade agreements to stabilize the *pays d’en haut*, reduce the chance of war, and protect each other from their Dutch, English, and Iroquois rivals. Like most native peoples, the Hurons and Algonquian-language speakers of the upper country traded with the French and other Europeans according to their own needs and their older traditions of intertribal trade. They might exchange furs for copper kettles, for example, but cut up the new vessels to make weapons or ornaments instead of cooking food. Rejecting the Europeans’ acquisitive or utilitarian attitude to wealth or material possessions, they tapped the *manitou* of for- --- eign products for spiritual power and social prestige as well as practical uses. They also expected generous presents from traders and officials to signify their friendship, whether they had furs to exchange or not. Throughout colonial North America, clashing understandings of trade inevitably led to numerous disputes between Indians and whites. Settlement patterns created marked differences between the French and English mainland colonies. French officials welcomed immigration, but Canada’s stern climate hindered agriculture, and French people seemed reluctant to abandon their homeland. Those who did come built homes and farms along the St. Lawrence River, but many trappers and traders married Indian women and did little to transplant French society into America. By contrast, the English mainland colonies had large and growing populations that outnumbered French Canada by twenty to one in the 1750s. England’s expanding colonies always thirsted for more Indian lands, but the French claimed vast territories without fully occupying them. The upper country has been called the Middle Ground because it bridged the worlds of Indians and Europeans and sheltered a diverse population who needed each other and mingled, intermarried, and did business there on terms of relative equality. The Middle Ground also linked New France to Louisiana, with its Mississippi outposts stretching as far north as modern Illinois. Recognizing the benefits of the Middle Ground, the French supported it with gifts, alliances, and mediation among its diverse inhabitants. Though the French and Indians shared control of this intermediate zone, Indians ruled the territories farther west. There, enduring Indian power safeguarded the fur trade, protected tribal autonomy, and held off land-hungry Anglo-Americas behind an arc of territory stretching from the Gulf of St. Lawrence to the Great Lakes and south to the Gulf of Mexico. Eighteenth-century war and diplomacy would severely test the security of this prized region, until the final expulsion of France from North America on the eve of the American Revolution. ### CARIBBEAN SUGAR COLONIES England, France, Spain, and Holland also competed in the development of West Indian sugar islands that purchased food and timber from the mainland colonies and introduced them to African slavery. Sugar became less important to Spain when silver proved more profitable, but production surged in Portuguese Brazil. The Dutch learned sugaring skills when they occupied Brazil from 1630 to 1654, brought --- cane cultivation to their own Caribbean colonies, and passed it to nearby English islands. England’s first sugar colonies appeared in the Lesser Antilles, a long chain of islands between Hispaniola and South America that Spain had bypassed on its way to the mainland. England occupied St. Kitts in 1624, soon followed by Barbados (1627), Nevis (1628), Montserrat (1632), and Antigua (1632). Only 166 square miles, Barbados stood out because of its fertility and its closer location to England and Africa. Much as in Virginia, early settlers cleared small farms with help from indentured servants who received some tools, supplies, and land (until it ran out) after five years of service. Also as in Virginia, masters inflicted beatings and other harsh punishments to make their servants work, and bought and sold them freely. The first planters tilled crops of tropical cotton and tobacco, but adopted sugar when Virginia’s leaf became more popular. The need for expensive machinery for grinding cane excluded small planters from the Barbados sugar boom, sending some to other islands and some to the mainland. Wealthier planters bought them out to create large estates of 150–200 acres, engrossed the