products. Like the policies that provoked the Massachusetts Regulators, Hamilton’s plan would tax ordinary Americans to reward a small number of financiers, but he thought the results would justify this sacrifice. If successful, his policies would use the national debt to leverage a prosperous future based on business, manufacturing, and trade, much as Sir Robert Walpole had done with the British national debt some seven decades earlier. When properly managed, he declared, “A public debt is a public blessing.” ### MADISON’S RESPONSE James Madison rejected the ideas that lay behind funding and assumption. In Congress, he fought unsuccessfully against repaying secondhand certificates at par, and opposed assumption because Virginia and several other states had already repaid their own debts, and, more fundamentally, because he could not believe that debt was ever a “blessing.” He was willing to compromise, however, and he and Hamilton reached agreement at a dinner arranged by Jefferson. Southerners wanted to locate the national capital on their own turf, especially on the Potomac River, a potential water highway to the West. When Hamilton conceded this point, Madison promised to find more votes --- for assumption and to minimize his own objections. This bargain moved the government from New York to Philadelphia for ten years, while the federal city of Washington, DC, began to rise from a Maryland swamp. Far removed from the commerce, culture, and pomp of big cities, rural patriots hoped that the new government would also escape the moral pollution of urban life. Another of Hamilton’s reports called for a Bank of the United States, modeled on the Bank of England, with a charter, or legal authorization, lasting 20 years and a capital of $20 million. The government would buy one-fifth of its shares and private investors would purchase the rest, using specie and the new federal bonds created by funding and assumption. The Bank would make loans to merchants in the form of paper notes they could exchange for specie and use to pay taxes, so these could circulate as a national currency. Merchants and businessmen would use their loans to expand operations and create new wealth. The Bank would also serve the government by holding its deposits, making payments, transferring funds, and selling or repaying its bonds. Like the Bank of England, the Bank of the United States would help make an agrarian economy more urban and commercial, and implement the goals of funding and assumption. Not surprisingly, Madison opposed a national bank as well. He not only questioned its benefits but called it unconstitutional because the Constitution gave Congress no explicit power to charter a corporation. The charter passed anyway, but Washington sought constitutional advice before signing it. Hamilton countered Madison’s arguments with an expansive interpretation of the Constitution that limited the force of the Tenth Amendment. He reminded the president that the Constitution permitted unspecified government actions that were “necessary and proper” to carry out its more explicit responsibilities, and claimed that Congress’s power to create money, collect taxes, borrow funds, and pay expenses implied the power to create a bank to perform those functions. Long after settling the Bank issue, Americans continued to debate Madison’s and Hamilton’s diverging views of the Constitution. Lawyers have called Madison’s narrow definition of federal powers strict construction (i.e., interpretation) of the Constitution, and Hamilton’s broader approach broad construction. Creating another precedent, Washington accepted Hamilton’s reasoning and signed the bill chartering the Bank of the United States in February 1791. Hamilton completed his economic proposals with reports calling --- for higher taxes on luxuries, especially distilled spirits, and direct subsidies and higher tariffs to encourage the growth of a manufacturing economy. His “Report on Manufactures” became a classic statement of the importance of industrial development for America’s future. To raise more revenue, Congress did tax liquor (not realizing how unpopular that would be) and increased some tariffs, but did not subsidize industry as Hamilton recommended. Madison opposed Hamilton’s “Report on Manufactures,” but when he was president in 1816, Congress adopted its first protective tariff to encourage American industry. Important differences in values and outlook inspired the debate between Madison and Hamilton. Unlike the New Yorker, Madison and his friend Jefferson were countrymen at heart, with no love for cities, no admiration of debt, grave suspicions of merchants, bankers, and financiers, and no desire for a society they dominated. Instead of regarding speculation as a normal business activity, they despised clever traders who snapped up securities for a song and redeemed them at par. Unlike Hamilton, they distrusted all things British and wanted more trade with France. They were not “antifederalists,” for Jefferson supported the Constitution and Madison had done more to write and ratify it than virtually anyone. Once the Constitution was adopted, however, both men interpreted it more strictly than Hamilton, favoring limited government, dispersed power, and landed interests both large and small. Jefferson especially believed that yeoman farmers were the ideal republican citizens. “Those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of God, if ever he had a chosen people,” he declared, “whose breasts he has made his peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue.” In short, Jefferson and Madison were the heirs of England’s Country Party and believed that Hamilton’s measures would destroy American liberty. Unlike the two Virginians, Hamilton’s career was entirely commercial, legal, and military. He had no ties to the landed gentry or to the customs of a particular place. His powerful personal ambitions were exclusively linked to the United States and its commerce, and he had no patience for limited government or the simple joys of farming. He thought America’s weakness made ties to Britain inescapable, unless it used British methods to become a mighty empire. Like Walpole and his Court Party, Hamilton thought centralized government, high taxes, high finance, and a national bank would make America wealthy and powerful. --- # THE FIRST PARTY SYSTEM Americans of the early republic associated the idea of “party” or “faction” with a small group working for its own interests, contrary to virtue and the common good. In *The Federalist Papers*, Madison and Hamilton had blamed factions for the problems of the 1780s and promised that the Constitution would cure them. To everyone’s surprise and hurt, however, Madison and Hamilton introduced factional divisions themselves. When Madison could not defeat Hamilton’s plans in Congress, Jefferson fought them in the Cabinet and urged the president to cast his veto. His unsuccessful efforts bred fierce personal hatred, until Hamilton regarded Jefferson as an ambitious demagogue and Jefferson accused Hamilton of plotting to restore monarchy. Seeing no other way to save the country from ruin, both organized their friends to fight their adversaries, and reluctantly created the nation’s first, rudimentary, political parties. Madison and Jefferson took the first steps. Consistent with their grassroots sympathies, their supporters called themselves “Democratic-Republicans,” and sometimes just “Democrats” or “Republicans,” insinuating that their enemies favored aristocracy or even monarchy. Hamilton’s followers moved more slowly, first calling themselves “the friends of government,” and later adopting “Federalist” to imply that they alone supported the Constitution. In fact, like Madison himself, many of the new Republicans had been dedicated federalists when the Constitution was adopted, and Hamilton’s Federalists did not really want a king. (The modern Democratic Party descends from Jefferson’s Republicans, while the modern Republican Party dates from the 1850s.) To rally sympathizers around the country, Madison invited poet Philip Freneau to move to Philadelphia in 1791 and launch an anti-Hamilton newspaper. Jefferson supported Freneau with a job in the State Department, and the *National Gazette* soon brimmed with partisan attacks, charging, for example, that Hamilton’s plans were “calculated to aggrandize the few and the wealthy, by oppressing the great body of the people . . . with unlimited impost and excise laws . . . copied from British statute books.” Hamilton struck back in John Fenno’s *Gazette of the United States*, accusing Republicans of anarchy, class warfare, and even treason. Hating personal confrontation, Jefferson resigned from the Cabinet in 1793, followed by Hamilton in 1795, but both led their parties --- from retirement. Congress soon split into Federalist and Republican camps, and so did the electorate. Republicans took the lead in drumming up mass meetings, adopting slogans and resolutions, sponsoring party newspapers, and organizing party caucuses, or closed meetings, to nominate candidates for office. Admiring tradition and established order, Federalists hated these tactics but copied them halfheartedly to avoid defeat. Generally speaking, Republicans and Federalists held opposing views on class and race that may appear paradoxical. Like William Thompson in his 1784 quarrel with John Rutledge of Charleston, Jeffersonians favored equality for all white men, but they were less likely to grant equality to nonwhites and usually accepted slavery. By contrast, Federalists took social class ranking for granted. Hamilton had hailed government by the “rich and well born” in the Constitutional Convention, and his fellow New York Federalist John Jay often declared that “the people who own the country ought to govern it.” Many northern Federalists disapproved of slavery, without endorsing full racial equality. Though Jay owned several slaves himself and so did Hamilton’s in-laws, for example, both were founding members of the New-York Society for Promoting the Manumission of Slaves. The paradox arose because Republicans usually saw citizenship as an all-or-nothing proposition. For them, “half equality” was meaningless, so an individual either had full civic rights or none at all. Republicans thus condemned anything less than complete political equality for all white men as “aristocracy” but imposed inequality on nonwhite men and all women. Federalists had a more traditional view, however, and saw society as an extended hierarchy based on multiple factors like race, property, and culture, with different rights and duties at each level. The established gentry took first place, and respectable blacks fell below middling whites but above white paupers. Federalist lawmakers could thus oppose slavery and support property requirements for voting by blacks and whites alike, while Republicans usually would not. The parties’ policy differences clearly resonated with their positons on class and race. Jefferson and Hamilton had originally divided over economic measures that pitted northeastern urban and commercial interests against southern and western farmers. These differences inevitably implicated slavery, for agrarian Republicans’ policies drew planters and yeomen together, while everyone seemed to assume that slavery and Federalist-style development were incompatible. Both --- sides were also well aware that the Constitution’s three-fifths clause bolstered the electoral power of southern Republicans and penalized northern Federalists. Slavery itself was usually not an explicit issue between Federalists and Republicans, but it hovered behind their other disputes. When issues related to slavery did appear, southern Republicans defended the institution more often than northern Federalists. Not surprisingly, the parties drew most of their votes from different sections of society. Support for commerce and shipping made Federalists especially popular among merchants and city dwellers and commercializing farmers in the rural Northeast. Federalists also attracted the traditional gentry, including some planters like George Washington and the Rutledges of South Carolina. New England’s religious establishment supported Federalists as defenders of tradition, but Baptists and other dissenters favored the religious liberties offered by Republicans. With a few holdouts in the tidewater and low country, most southern planters supported the Republican party of their fellow slaveholders Jefferson and Madison. Since the aftermath of Bacon’s Rebellion, they had benefited from the trend toward white equality and racism that Republicans favored, and they also came to realize that small, weak government would be safer for slavery and agriculture. The Republican pledge of equality also attracted white artisans and yeoman farmers, especially in the middle states and the southern backcountry, and wealthy men who rose from humble origins. Historians have called the rivalry of Federalists and Republicans America’s First Party System, but these parties were still rudimentary. They were not as well defined or well organized as their later counterparts, and none of their participants accepted party competition as a normal or beneficial aspect of free government. Jefferson compared Republicans and Federalists to “the parties of honest men and rogues, into which every country is divided,” and his Federalist opponents thought likewise. Both looked forward to the day when their party enemies would be vanquished entirely, and polite consensus could return, but party competition became permanent, and gradually reduced more irregular forms of dissent like mob violence. ## Trials of Strength Washington’s administration soon faced challenges that sharply tested its authority. In 1789, a revolution broke out in France that ignited war in Europe and led to attacks on American commerce. To the west, --- Britain still encouraged Indian attacks from its Ohio forts. The tax on liquor aroused furious and violent opposition. The challenges were so severe that party leaders suspected their opponents of conspiring with the nation’s enemies and wondered if the government would survive. ### THE FRENCH REVOLUTION AND AMERICAN DIPLOMACY Just as the Washington administration began in 1789, French revolutionaries overthrew the absolute monarchy of King Louis XVI and launched a radical transformation of French society and government. Most Americans were pleased at first and hoped that their own republican example would spread across Europe. The French Revolution horrified Europe’s conservatives, however, and Britain was soon leading other powers in a war to restore the “Old Regime.” When the king sided with his nation’s enemies, revolutionaries beheaded him and his wife, Queen Marie-Antoinette, and proclaimed France a republic. Inspired by the Enlightenment’s cult of reason and deism, they also attacked the Catholic Church for defending the old order with what they called “superstitions.” These events unleashed a storm that swept the Atlantic world for most of the next generation. Federalists quickly turned against the French Revolution and its violent assaults on established society and religion. Republicans were more sympathetic, for they prided themselves on support for class equality and opposition to conservative traditions. They also remembered French support for American independence and hated to imitate Britain. Jefferson was so enthusiastic that he forgave the revolution’s excesses and later claimed that “rather than it should have failed, I would have seen half the earth desolated.” To celebrate equality in both republics, supporters formed Democratic-Republican Societies that reminded Federalists of France’s revolutionary Jacobin Clubs. Attacked in Europe, France dispatched Citizen Edmond-Charles Genêt to seek assistance from its old American ally, but the clumsy emissary threatened to drag the United States into war by licensing and equipping privateers, or armed private vessels, to attack British shipping. Unwilling to risk America’s existence for France, Washington issued a Proclamation of Neutrality in 1793. Genêt would not accept this decision and kept recruiting supporters, warmly courting the Democratic-Republican Societies, and hinting at Washington’s overthrow. The infuriated president demanded Genêt’s recall, and the --- Genêt Affair convinced Federalists that French revolutionaries could never be trusted. Soon afterward, Genêt’s party fell from power in France, and he only escaped the guillotine by staying in America as a private citizen. ## WESTERN AND ATLANTIC CHALLENGES The Washington administration juggled two military conflicts as it contended with Citizen Genêt—both involving Britain. To the west, Britain had surrendered its claims on the Ohio country at the end of the American Revolution and, contrary to its promises, failed to defend Indian interests in the peace treaty. It had not abandoned its forts and trading posts in the area, however, and used them to encourage Indian resistance to American expansion. From the Indians’ perspective, the American Revolution had not been a principled fight for liberty but another imperial war much like the Seven Years’ War and its predecessors. In both cases, the victors threatened Indian lands and autonomy. After the British defeat at Yorktown, therefore, Miami chief Little Turtle, Shawnee chief Blue Jacket, and Iroquois leader Joseph Brant followed the previous example of Pontiac and organized what whites called the Northwest Confederacy to maintain control of the Ohio country. Though Brant eschewed warfare, Little Turtle and Blue Jacket led 1,000 Indian fighters in 1791 against an equal number of Americans commanded by General Arthur St. Clair. In a breathtaking victory that shocked and angered George Washington, the Indians prevailed overwhelmingly, killing or wounding all but 24 of St. Clair’s men. St. Clair’s Defeat, or the Battle of the Wabash, was the biggest defeat that American forces ever suffered at the hands of Native Americans. It took the Washington administration two years to recruit and train another army, the 2,000-man United States Legion, commanded by General Anthony “Mad Anthony” Wayne. Their forces met in 1794 at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, and this time, the Americans prevailed against a body of 1,500 Shawnees, Delawares, Miamis, Wyandots, Ojibwas, Ottawas, Potawatomis, and Mingos, plus a detachment of white Canadians. In 1795, the chiefs of the Northwest Confederacy surrendered most of modern Ohio and parts of Indiana and Illinois at the Treaty of Greenville. White settlement of the ceded territory soon surged ahead, governed by the provisions of the Northwest Ordinance. --- The Chickamaugas, a breakaway band of Cherokees, conducted a parallel fight against white expansion in the South. Led by Dragging Canoe, the Chickamaugas had not joined the Cherokee surrender that followed white attacks in 1776 and 1777, but retreated west to new towns along the Tennessee River. When militia commanded by Colonel John Sevier destroyed those settlements in 1782, Dragging Canoe again led the Chickamaugas to safety and then launched a series of raids all along the trans-Appalachian frontier from Tennessee to Indiana. He helped organize the Northwest Confederacy and also allied with the Creeks under Alexander McGillivray. After his death in 1792, Chickamauga raids continued through the 1790s. Overlapping with the Indian war, Britain and France still attempted to block each other’s foreign trade and subjected the United States to assaults from both sides. America’s commercial economy had long depended on Atlantic commerce, and American merchants and shipowners did extensive business with both belligerents, but British seizures of American ships were more serious and demanded effective response. Finally, Americans had never repaid their pre-Revolutionary debts to the British, while Britain still discriminated against American products and refused to pay for slaves who had escaped with them in the War for Independence. When a British crackdown in the French Caribbean seized some 250 American ships in 1793, furious Republicans called for war, but President Washington sent Chief Justice John Jay to Britain to settle these outstanding differences. In 1795, Jay came back with a treaty that averted war but kept America’s economy tied to Britain’s. In it, Britain agreed to pay for the ships it had seized, to vacate its western forts, and to give the United States limited trading rights with its Caribbean colonies. In return, the United States gave Britain “most favored nation” status, which gave Britain the best available terms in trading with Americans. The United States also agreed to pay its citizens’ pre-Revolutionary debts to Britain. The treaty did not acknowledge Americans’ right to trade with France or compensate masters for runaway slaves. General Wayne’s defeat of Little Turtle and Blue Jacket probably played an important role in the outcome, for Britain might otherwise have kept its northwest forts and continued to support its Indian allies. Jay had done his best with a weak hand, but his treaty enraged Republicans. In their eyes, any agreement with England implied American humiliation and betrayal of France, while southerners still resented the loss of slave property. Federalists replied that the treaty’s commer- --- cial advantages outweighed its defects. While the Senate debated in secret, party presses teemed with abuse and mass meetings burned Jay in effigy. A typical blast came from the youthful Andrew Jackson, still a political unknown in Tennessee. Instead of ratifying the treaty, he snarled, Congress should “have the insulting cringing and ignominious Child of aristocratic Secracy removed Erased and obliterated from the archives of the Grand republick of the United States.” Such reactions did not block the Senate’s ratification or even the House’s vote for implementation funds. They did bring Federalist and Republican doctrines to thousands of ordinary citizens and carried party rivalry from the Congress to the streets. The “people out of doors” had not spoken so loudly since the era of the Revolution. A second treaty pleased Republicans more, especially in the South and West. Settlers there had long complained that Spanish control of the Mississippi blocked their access to the outside world, and muttered threats of secession unless conditions improved. When Britain agreed to leave the Northwest, Spain retreated as well. A 1795 treaty negotiated by Thomas Pinckney of South Carolina accepted a Florida border at the 31st parallel, allowed free navigation of the Mississippi, and granted the right of deposit, or duty-free storage of goods, at New Orleans. Domestic protest also tried the government’s authority. Congress had raised more revenue for funding and assumption with an excise tax on distilled liquor. The tax angered Scots-Irish settlers in the backcountry who turned their surplus corn into fiery whiskey that accompanied every male activity from business deals to haymaking. Easier to transport than corn itself, whiskey was important to local and long-distance trade, and the tax weighed heaviest on small producers. Republican editors and officeholders fanned the flames of western anger, cursing Hamilton’s excise and linking it to Walpole-style corruption and extravagance. ### WASHINGTON’S FAREWELL Complaints were loudest in western Pennsylvania, where antifederalism had been strong, shippers clamored for an open Mississippi, and farmers often distilled their corn into whiskey to export it. In what came to be called the Whiskey Rebellion, irate frontier farmers there treated the liquor tax like the Stamp