vice-admiralty courts, which did not use juries, tried all violations of the Navigation Acts, so colonial lawbreakers could not count on sympathetic neighbors to protect them from convictions. Slavery was an important aspect of imperial trade that tied all the colonies together, regardless of its local importance. Slavery was essential to the cultivation of the empire’s most valuable commodities, including sugar, tobacco, rice, and indigo, and made the West Indies, the Chesapeake colonies, and South Carolina into full-fledged slave societies very early. Caribbean colonies were especially valuable. As early as 1700, for example, Barbados, Jamaica, and the Leeward Islands were annually producing about £768,600 in sugar, rum, and molasses, while the Chesapeake’s annual exports only equaled £218,300. By the time of the American Revolution, the annual value --- of British West Indian sugar products had risen to some £3.9 million. Sugar, molasses, and rum were so valuable that the sugar colonies produced virtually nothing else, and imported all their other necessities from England or the mainland. The slave economies of the Caribbean thus supported the economies of the other colonies, providing crucial markets for such products as foodstuffs, livestock, and wood for fuel, building, and sugar barrels. In the late colonial years, for example, New England sold well over half its total exports in the West Indies and the proportion for the middle colonies was almost as high. The Navigation Acts were particularly important to colonists who participated directly in international trade, especially the merchants who bought and sold the colonies’ principal products, and the planters and farmers who supplied them. These men held the highest and wealthiest ranks in colonial society, dominated the assemblies, and paid close attention to the twists and turns of English politics. The fall of a minister, the rise of a privileged new interest group, the hint of a tightened or loosened approach to commercial regulation, all received anxious and intense attention in the taverns and coffeehouses where men of business gathered to discuss the news. During the 1680s, these were the men who paid closest attention to the English political crisis that led to the overthrow of King James II. Unexpectedly, the crisis also affected the views of many other Americans on the proper relationship between liberty, property, religion, kingship, and representative government. ### JAMES II AND THE GLORIOUS REVOLUTION King Charles II had no legitimate children, so when he died in 1685, his brother James became the new king. Repeating the mistakes that dethroned his father, James also ignored the Parliament and seemed to prefer ruling England as an absolute monarch. He and his ministers also worried about the colonies’ tendencies to go their own way, especially Massachusetts, which governed itself under the charter of the old Massachusetts Bay Company. As early as 1676, the Crown had sent its trusted emissary Edward Randolph to investigate the Massachusetts government in the aftermath of Metacom’s War. Randolph was astonished to discover that officials in Boston, the largest port in North America, were completely ignoring the Navigation Acts on the grounds that their colony’s charter exempted it from acts of Parliament. Randolph struggled to correct --- that situation, but met only limited success and bitterly complained that Boston’s defiance cost the kingdom more than £100,000 annually. Randolph’s protests finally led English courts to revoke the charter of Massachusetts in 1684, but King Charles had not decided on a new government before his death the next year. The new king and his ministers sought an administration for Massachusetts and all the colonies that would protect English revenues, enforce the mercantilist system, and firmly bind them to imperial rule. James also distrusted New England on religious grounds. All the Stuart kings had resented what they viewed as the disorderly and anti-monarchical tendencies of radical Protestantism, but only James II repudiated the Reformation and tried to restore the Catholic Church. As we have seen, this step gave him an interest in religious toleration and strengthened his friendship with William Penn. James also married an Italian Catholic princess who gave birth to a healthy son in 1688 and was promptly baptized in his parents’ faith. Under James II, England seemed poised for a return to Catholicism. Most Protestant Englishmen were deeply prejudiced against “popery,” which they associated with treason and tyranny, and supported discriminatory laws against Catholics as potential public enemies. James tried to help the Catholic minority by promoting toleration, but he did so by defying anti-Catholic laws and asserting his right to ignore the will of Parliament. These claims frightened English and American Protestants who remembered the struggle against the absolutist ambitions of Charles I. They worried especially in New England, where Puritan leading ministers and magistrates still believed that Puritan uniformity was essential to public order and the preservation of New England’s sacred covenant with the Lord. James’s religious and constitutional views reinforced each other and inspired an attack on New England’s independence. In 1686, he revoked the charters of Connecticut and Rhode Island, and lumped them together with Massachusetts, Plymouth, and New Hampshire in a new entity called the Dominion of New England. Citing the need for stricter enforcement of the Navigation Acts, he appointed as governor-general Sir Edmund Andros to rule the new government without an elected assembly, and added New York and New Jersey two years later. While eliminating self-government, the new administration ended legal privileges for Puritanism and even seized Boston’s South Church for Anglican services. Going further, James hinted that he would like to subject all the other colonies to a similar consolidated --- arrangement, which resembled a Spanish viceroyalty more than a traditional English colony. Unfortunately for him, James’s religious and political views were as unpopular in England as they were America. Political leaders divided into rival camps: those who opposed his policies were called Whigs and his supporters were called Tories. Profoundly fearful of Catholicism and absolutism, a handful of prominent Whigs reached out to James’s Protestant daughter Mary, wife of the leading Dutch nobleman, Prince William of Orange. At their invitation, William crossed the English Channel with an army in 1688, and James fled to France. Early the following year, Parliament proclaimed William and Mary the joint sovereigns of England and Scotland, with executive power held by William. War broke out between France and England, as James got help from King Louis XIV in an unsuccessful effort to reclaim his crown. To prevent future monarchs from repeating James’s offenses, Parliament required William and Mary to accept a statute called the English Bill of Rights. Still a pillar of the British constitution, this far-reaching law defined James’s flight as an abdication of the throne, required all future kings to be Protestant, and praised King William as “the glorious instrument of delivering this kingdom from popery and arbitrary power.” It further declared that the monarch could never set aside a law, raise taxes or maintain a peacetime army without Parliament’s consent, or detain any subject contrary to established law. It guaranteed free and frequent elections to Parliament and protected freedom of speech in Parliament. It barred cruel and unusual punishment and excessive bail, while protecting free deliberations by juries and the right of Protestants to bear arms. Many of its provisions were later included in the Bill of Rights of the United States Constitution. The Bill of Rights established the supremacy of Parliament in English law. While the absolute monarchs of the Continent continued to claim that Almighty God had placed them on their thrones with the “divine right” to rule with no restraint but God’s own laws, the future kings of England were constrained by the will of their subjects. This did not mean that seventeenth- or eighteenth-century England had become a democracy. The subjects’ “consent” was conveyed by Parliament, and Parliament obeyed the titled nobility, the rural gentry, urban businessmen, and the great merchants and bankers who dominated the city of London, not the ordinary population of the realm. Even so, Englishmen became so pleased with the events of 1688–1689 --- that they called James’s overthrow their Glorious Revolution, and they began to make the liberty of the English government their proudest national boast. In the aftermath of the revolution, John Locke, the philosopher who had earlier composed the authoritarian Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina, found it safe to publish his *Two Treatises of Government*, attacking the divine right of kings. Locke argued that men (not women) had created governments to protect their natural rights, especially to their lives and personal liberty, and their property or the fruits of their labor. A just government was thus founded on a voluntary agreement, or social contract, between the people and their rulers in which the people surrendered some of their natural liberty to their rulers in exchange for protecting the rest. When rulers violated men’s rights, as James II had done, they broke the compact, and the people had a right to replace them. The spirit of the *Two Treatises* differed sharply from the feudalistic measures of the Fundamental Constitutions and gave strong philosophical support to the Glorious Revolution. Locke’s new thinking had a profound impact on subsequent British and American ideas about the nature and value of public and private liberty. ### THE GLORIOUS REVOLUTION IN AMERICA The Glorious Revolution had immediate repercussions in America. James’s efforts to cancel colonial charters, abolish assemblies, and replace elected officials with appointees had been very unpopular. When rumors arrived that the king had been overthrown and war had broken out with France, colonists celebrated the end of a hated reign and struck out against imagined Catholic conspiracies to restore it. In Massachusetts, a popular uprising toppled the Dominion of New England and jailed Governor-General Sir Edmund Andros and most of his top lieutenants. As we saw earlier, a militia led by Major Jacob Leisler overthrew the Dominion in New York, while Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Plymouth quietly resumed their former governments. Protestants seized power in Maryland, convinced that their Catholic proprietor would inevitably side with James and the French. When the dust settled, colonists discovered that King William disapproved of these disruptions and did not believe that a change of kings gave them new powers or permitted disobedience of established authority. Imperial officials continued to believe that the purpose of the empire was to benefit England through trade, and enforcing the --- rules of a trading empire could require a firm hand and a strong measure of central control. If colonial governments needed adjustments, the king and his ministers would attend to those themselves. If their governments needed adjustment to comply with the revolution, they would deal with that too. William accordingly released the former officials whom rebellious colonists had sent home for trial and slowly considered his next steps. Eventually he decided to give up the Dominion of New England and allowed Connecticut and Rhode Island to resume their previous governments. He joined Plymouth to Massachusetts under a new royal charter that balanced an elected assembly with an appointed governor and gave all Protestants legal equality. In Maryland, William confirmed the overthrow of the Catholic proprietorship and installed a royal government, though the Calverts regained their property when they joined the Church of England in 1715. The Glorious Revolution left its deepest mark in America on New York. In the spring of 1689, local administration had collapsed along with the Dominion of New England. Panicked rumors swirled that French Catholics would revenge the overthrow of King James by sending Indians to attack the Hudson Valley, scalping and pillaging everywhere. A committee of safety formed in New York City and handed power to militia commander Jacob Leisler, who repeatedly invoked the language of popular rights and Protestant radicalism to justify his authority. But Leisler was a clumsy politician who manipulated elections, jailed all who crossed him, and saw papists everywhere. Fears of French and Indian attack came true with a serious raid on Schenectady, but Leisler could not respond effectively and became increasingly unpopular. Jacob Leisler finally overstepped in 1691 when he refused to surrender Manhattan’s fort to the duly appointed new governor. After his execution, New York became a royal colony with an elected assembly like the others, but Leisler’s bitter legacy remained. His rebellion had revealed serious class and ethnic rivalries, with poorer Dutch residents tending to support him against wealthier English settlers. In addition to these ongoing tensions, Leisler had treated his opponents so harshly and his own punishment was so severe that the surviving leaders of each side fiercely hated each other, leaving New York divided between Leislerians and Anti-Leislerians for a generation to come. Old-line Massachusetts Puritans mourned their lost charter and lost independence, but most colonies welcomed the Glorious Revolution. Most whites were devoted English subjects who held the same --- religious and political values as their kinfolk back home. The events of 1688–1689 seemed to confirm that English government rested on popular consent, that representative bodies must approve all taxes, and that popular liberty required strict legal protection and a balance between the power of the king (known as the royal prerogative) and the power of legislative assemblies. Colonial Englishmen assumed that these guarantees applied to them as much as to Englishmen at home. English leaders drew a different lesson from the revolution. They concluded that Parliament alone was supreme within the empire, not representative institutions in general. The colonies still existed to serve the mother country, so they could not be entirely equal to it. In practice, this meant that if the combined will of the king and Parliament clashed with the views of colonial assemblies, the assemblies would have to give way. The conflict between these two points of view would later have a crucial significance that few people noticed in the jubilant aftermath of the Glorious Revolution. # The Empire and the British Constitution As the revolution’s turmoil gradually subsided, colonial governments settled into stable routines. One major theme in the prevailing pattern was the importance of international rivalries, particularly the rivalry between England, France, and their Native American allies for control of North America. Another was the continued relevance of events and developments in Britain. ### FIGHTING THE FRENCH AND INDIANS Britain and France clashed frequently in the eighteenth century and all their wars involved America. Indians played an active role, carefully choosing and changing sides and recruiting Europeans to their own quarrels, just as Europeans sought Indian allies for theirs. American-based combat could take the form of colonial assaults on strongholds of the enemy, or it could erupt from skirmishes in Indian country between the English colonies and New France. All contestants between the Ohio River and the Great Lakes tried to play their multiple adversaries against each other, striving to protect their independence and the terms of trade. Parallel contests emerged in the similar space where the claims of Spanish Florida, French Louisiana, and English Georgia overlapped in the homelands of the Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Creek Indians. --- For all sides, the most immediate stakes of colonial war were control of the interior fur trade, though the balance of power in Europe also worried diplomats. From the colonial perspective, all the major military conflicts from 1689 to 1763 were really French and Indian wars, though only the last one, known in Europe as the Seven Years’ War (1756–1763), was remembered by that name in America. Instead, Americans called the others by the name of the reigning monarch, while the English named them after relevant events in Europe: King William’s War (War of the League of Augsburg, 1689–1697), Queen Anne’s War (War of Spanish Succession, 1702–1713), and King George’s War (War of Austrian Succession, 1740–1748). Other wars pitted groups of tribes against white Americans and their Indian allies, without the involvement of European powers. Resenting white incursions on their lands, for example, Tuscarora Indians descended on North Carolina settlements in 1711 and killed hundreds of whites. Unable to defend itself, North Carolina sought aid from South Carolina, which sent a party of Yamasee Indians under white command. They crushed the Tuscaroras by 1713 and repaid themselves by selling hundreds of captives into slavery. Most surviving Tuscaroras then joined their kinfolk in New York to become the sixth nation of the Iroquois Confederacy. Only two years later, the Yamasees and their allies among the Catawbas, Creeks, and neighboring tribes launched their own war against South Carolina and killed approximately 7 percent of its white population. The colony survived by recruiting Cherokees to counterattack and kill or enslave most of the Yamasees. The outcomes of the Tuscarora and Yamasee Wars were conspicuous examples of the widespread enslavement of Native Americans by colonial whites. Columbus himself had originated the practice, but King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella had banned it in favor of forcing Indian labor through the *encomienda* system. New Englanders had enslaved captives in their wars with the Pequots, Wampanoags, and other tribes. Carolinians were especially active slavers, and sold as many as 30,000–50,000 Indians between 1670 and 1715. To reduce the chance of uprisings, most went to the West Indies instead of local plantations. Across the Southeast, slave raids by whites and by other Indians wiped out numerous small tribes such as the Westos of South Carolina, as well as most of the native inhabitants of lowland Georgia and Florida and the coastal tribes of Louisiana, and even struck large groups such as the Creeks, Choctaws, and Chickasaws. Native combatants did not believe they were fighting “their own people” in these conflicts because they did not embrace a common identity. As always, tribes --- fought one another for revenge, but also to gain resources like hunting grounds or favorable trading positions. As their numbers declined, tribes could try to rebound by consolidating with others or adopting captives, but they could also sell their prisoners to the whites. Each of these conflicts brought terror and destruction to colonial frontiers and their Indian neighbors. In Queen Anne’s War, for example, a party of French, Mohawks, and other Indians attacked the town of Deerfield, Massachusetts, killed over 40 inhabitants, and captured 112 for ransom. Other campaigns saw large colonial mobilizations to attack the enemy’s military strongholds. Creeks and Carolinians besieged St. Augustine in 1704, and a New England expedition in King George’s War took the massive French fortress of Louisburg on Cape Breton Island in northeast Canada. War also changed or strengthened imperial claims. In Queen Anne’s War, for example, Britain took Canada’s Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, and Hudson Bay, while France strengthened its hold on the Mississippi Valley. ### THE EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY ### BRITISH CONSTITUTION In 1707, Parliament passed the Act of Union to merge the previously separate countries of England and Scotland into the new kingdom of Great Britain. The change gave Scots access to American markets, and Scottish merchants came to have an increasingly important role in the eighteenth-century tobacco trade. Americans also attended closely to the succession of British monarchs. Worried that the Catholic Stuarts, supported by plotters called Jacobites, might once more try to seize the throne and undo the Glorious Revolution, Parliament passed the Act of Settlement in 1701 to reemphasize that no Catholic could occupy the throne. When Queen Anne (Mary’s sister, who succeeded the joint monarchs) died childless in 1714, the new king was accordingly her Protestant cousin George I, from the German principality of Hanover. Taken all together, these laws and actions became major features of the eighteenth-century British constitution, which was never written down in a single place or adopted in a formal deliberative process, but won deep popular loyalty as the freest government in the world. Britain’s constitution was based on a theory of mixed, or balanced, government. Political thinkers assumed that there were three fundamental divisions in society: the king, the nobility, and the common people. Each of these segments underpinned one of the three classic forms of government: monarchy, or government by one; aristocracy, --- or government by a few; and democracy, or government by many. By themselves, theorists agreed that each of these systems was vulnerable to a corresponding abuse—tyranny, oligarchy, or anarchy—that could overturn liberty and order. Eighteenth-century Englishmen believed that the rest of Europe and Asia already suffered from varying degrees of tyranny, but their own mixed constitution protected liberty by combining the best parts of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy. Each segment of society supposedly controlled a different branch of the British government: the Crown, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons. Each of these institutions provided government with a different benefit: firmness and single-mindedness from the Crown, stability and wisdom from the Lords, and love of liberty from the Commons. New laws required the consent of all three branches, so the liberties promised by the Glorious Revolution to Englishmen of every rank were considered safe. Boasting of their freedom from arbitrary power, Englishmen and Americans embraced the new philosophical theories of John Locke, and proudly claimed that any future would-be tyrant would suffer the fate of James II. The British government operated very differently in practice. The German-born King George I could not speak English, so Sir Robert Walpole, First Lord of the Treasury and the king’s principal minister, led the government without much royal interference. The appearance of parliamentary supremacy remained, but Walpole managed to control opinion in the House of Commons by distributing government jobs and patronage to its members and their relatives and other dependents. Though Crown and Parliament jointly ruled the country, Walpole prevented serious conflict between them while dominating both between 1721 and 1742. Though the House of Commons spoke for the people of the realm, moreover, it did not represent them directly. Property requirements limited voting rights, most members came from medieval towns, or boroughs, with widely varying populations, and some large cities sent no representatives at all. Rotten boroughs had lost so much population that the remaining voters could be bribed or intimidated. Some ancient