Delegates, so the 620 whites of the Tidewater’s Warwick County had as much clout as the 17,000 whites of Shenandoah County in the west. When representation was so unequal, nonslaveholding communities had minimal legislative power no matter who voted. Planters opposed legislative reapportionment far more than white male suffrage. The noisiest and most dramatic campaign took place in the Virginia constitutional convention of 1829–1830. The existing state constitution denied the ballot to as many as half of the Old Dominion’s white men and gave most legislative seats to the Tidewater. Backcountry representatives fought hard in the convention, battling Tidewater conservatives for political equality. Eastern delegate Benjamin Watkins Leigh boldly avowed that slavery required white inequality, for with equal voting rights, westerners would impose ruinous taxes on eastern slaveholders to pay for extravagant internal improvements. Going further, Leigh compared eastern slaves to those he scornfully called “the peasantry of the west.” “In every civilized country under the sun,” he declared, “some there must be who labour for their daily bread.” Whether they were slaves, peasants, or Virginia mountaineers, civilization would not survive if these underlings gained equality. Unfazed by this radical rejection of its Jeffersonian heritage, the Virginia convention tinkered modestly with suffrage and representation requirements but the most glaring inequalities remained until 1850. In 1831, a year and a half after the convention adjourned, Nat Turner’s slave revolt reawakened Virginians to slavery’s dangers and reopened their debate over liberty, equality, and the future of slavery. Thomas Jefferson Randolph, grandson and namesake of the sage of Monticello, proposed to make all slaves born after July 4, 1840, state property and to hire them out to defray the costs of resettling them outside the United States. Packed with spectators, the House of Delegates seriously debated the proposal for two weeks in January 1832. Mindful that the recent convention had preserved white inequality for --- the sake of slavery, western representatives assailed the system’s backwardness and injustice, but conservatives fended them off. Finally the House decided that Randolph’s plan would be “inexpedient.” Professor Thomas R. Dew of the College of William and Mary followed the vote with a pamphlet demonstrating the utter impracticality of any proposal to colonize Virginia’s slaves abroad. This outcome ended all public discussion of a peaceful and voluntary end to slavery in the nation’s largest slave state. Whatever they thought in private, most defenders of slavery maintained publicly that slavery made whites more equal, not less. Judge Abel Upshur argued that slavery granted the poor white man something more precious than the right to vote. “However poor, or ignorant, or miserable he may be,” the judge offered, “he has yet the consoling consciousness that there is still a lower condition to which he can never be reduced.” Going further, politicians often claimed that whites’ equal superiority over blacks obliterated class distinctions in white society. “Let us keep the white race as they are here now and ever ought to be,” cried an Alabama congressman, “free, equal, and independent, socially and politically, recogniz[ing] no subordinate but those whom God made to be such—the children of Ham [i.e., Africans].” Despite such boasts, white men were not really equal in the Old South. Economic inequality was greater in the South than the North because slavery enabled masters to gain a disproportionate share of wealth, land, and political power. Great planters deployed refinements in education, dress, manners, religion, artistic taste, and genealogy (both real and imaginary) to distinguish themselves from the multitude. Class lines were less stable in the Southwest than the Southeast, for huge cotton crops could outweigh traditional symbols of taste and family. Even there, however, the backslapping politician who invited everyone in the district to an annual barbecue never admitted the poorest voters to his parlor. These devices enabled wealthy southerners to maintain an uneasy balance between the potentially conflicting principles of white democracy and social inequality. ### LIBERTY, HONOR, AND VIOLENCE The presence of slaves constantly reminded white men of what the loss of liberty entailed, and encouraged them to cherish their own public and private liberty. Slave society also linked liberty to the power of command, for true freemen gave orders while chattels followed them. Freemen also demanded equal respect from each other, and those who --- settled for less joined the powerless and unfree. Southern politicians frequently won elections by campaigning against real or imagined threats to public liberty. As discussed in detail in chapter 11, President Andrew Jackson denounced the Bank of the United States for attacking liberty, and Jackson had scores of state and local imitators. The linkage of liberty to personal authority, plus the violence of slavery itself, invited southerners to glorify male power, masculine pastimes, and “manly” virtues. Noticeably more than other Americans, southern men delighted in hunting, fishing, gambling, horseracing, and cockfighting. The temperance movement came late to the South and had less impact there. Southern evangelicals struggled to win male converts, who resented the humility and contrition that sincere conversion required. Southerners flocked to the nation’s military academies, stressed military education in their own colleges and boarding schools, and dominated the army’s and navy’s officer corps. Above all, southern society tolerated a high level of personal violence. If insulted or challenged, white men were expected to fight for their “honor,” or their public reputations for courage, strength, honesty, and the willingness to protect their dependents, especially women. “Their code of honour is so exceedingly strict that it requires the greatest circumspection to escape its violation,” reported a Scottish visitor to Virginia. “An offence which elsewhere would be regarded as of homeopathic [minor] proportions, is very apt to assume in Richmond the gravity of colossal dimensions.” Honor was intimately tied to social rank, for slaves could have no honor, and freemen who submitted to insults were humiliated and demeaned. Common whites defended their reputations with rough-and-tumble bouts of eye-gouging or nose-biting. A gentleman offended by a social inferior revenged himself with a cane or a horsewhip, but settled differences with other gentlemen by the meticulous ritual of the dueling ground. Laws forbade the practice, but dueling became a virtual rite of passage for young men who knew that facing an enemy’s bullet demonstrated manhood and bravery, while submitting to an insult could bring humiliation and ostracism. The culture of honor encouraged the belief that flexibility and compromise were demeaning, an attitude that southerners carried with them into politics. ### THE POLITICAL DEFENSE OF SLAVERY In the era of the Revolution and the early republic, white southerners rarely mounted a thorough defense of slavery and often called it a --- necessary evil. Virginians like Jefferson admitted that slavery was unjust but blamed New Englanders or the British for introducing it and claimed that blacks had become too numerous and dangerous to liberate. Perhaps if slaves were allowed to spread out, or “diffuse,” across a broad expanse of western territory, Virginians sometimes suggested, whites would eventually outnumber them so completely that emancipation would become safe. Until then, abolition without compensating the masters and deporting the freed people was out of the question, and any public discussion of it might incite a revolt. South Carolinians and Georgians had never been as ambivalent about slavery as the Virginians, and vigorously defended it in the Constitutional Convention and the Congress. After the Missouri crisis of 1819–1820 (see chapter 11) and especially after the rise of radical abolitionism, most southern spokesmen discarded the tone of apology and launched a passionate defense of their Peculiar Institution. Some southern intellectuals eventually favored slavery so strongly that they abandoned the basic principles of republican equality, even for white men. A pivotal moment came in 1837, when South Carolina’s eminent senator John C. Calhoun called on his colleagues to ignore all anti-slavery petitions. “I do not belong to that school,” he proclaimed, in language taken directly from the pugnacious culture of dueling, “which holds that aggression is to be met with concession. . . . Those who act on [that] principle are prepared to become slaves.” Rejecting the slightest compromise, he repeated Benjamin Watkins Leigh’s view that “there never has existed a wealthy and civilized society in which one portion of the community did not . . . live upon the labor of the other.” In Calhoun’s view, American slavery was simply a variant on this universal principle, so allegedly free laborers in Europe and the North were slaves in fact if not in name. Slavery was a kinder form of exploitation than freedom, he believed, because masters cared for slaves in sickness and old age, while “free” laborers faced starvation when they could not work. Unlike free workers, moreover, slaves could never go on strike or agitate for rights they did not deserve. As a result, Calhoun famously concluded, slavery was no necessary evil but “a good — a positive good.” Southern spokesmen continued to repeat and expand on Calhoun’s “positive good” theory in ensuing decades. Senator James Henry Hammond, also of South Carolina, sharpened the argument with a particularly grating expression when he declared that “Cotton is King.” “In all --- social systems there must be a class to do the menial duties, to perform the drudgery of life. That is, a class requiring but a low order of intellect and but little skill,” he explained in 1858. “It constitutes the very mud-sill of society and political government; and you might as well attempt to build a house in the air . . . except on this mud-sill.” Black slaves played the role of “mud-sill,” or structural foundation, in the South, but white wage earners did the same in the North. The southern system was superior, he claimed, because blacks were fitted by nature for servitude, and their enslavement allowed poor whites to enjoy the liberty and equality they deserved. Virginia planter George Fitzhugh took the proslavery argument to its furthest extreme. In several pamphlets and two major books, *Sociology for the South, or the Failure of Free Society* (1854) and *Cannibals All! Or, Slaves without Masters* (1857), Fitzhugh moved beyond race to defend slavery “in the abstract,” boldly declaring that enslavement would benefit all inferior people, white as well as black. Deploring the suffering of free but poverty-stricken wage laborers and denouncing the competitive economy that left them starving, Fitzhugh condemned free society as merely giving “license to the strong to oppress the weak.” In his view, the strong should *own* the weak, for masters would care for human property of any race, love them as a father loves his family, protect them in sickness and old age, and require no more labor than was good for them. He therefore challenged the advocates of slavery to stop defending bondage for one race only and to forthrightly call for enslaving all workers, including whites. As he put it, radically reversing Jeffersonian equality, “‘Some [people] were born with saddles on their backs, and others booted and spurred to ride them’—and the riding does them good.” Fitzhugh remained a marginal figure, for the enslavement of white people was just what successful politicians promised to prevent, but his ideas showed how far some defenders of slavery were willing to go in rejecting the republican principles of the American Revolution. In effect, Fitzhugh’s argument overturned the cliché that black slavery created white liberty and suggested the opposite: black slavery *threatened* white liberty, for it showed why *all* inferiors should be enslaved, white as well as black. By 1860, Fitzhugh, Hammond, Calhoun, Leigh, and their countless imitators had constructed a proslavery version of republicanism at odds with the North’s free labor version. Both made the liberty of the individual white man indispensable for the common good, but the --- southern version based liberty on racial superiority and the power of command, not on the dignifying and empowering role of work. Proslavery republicanism infuriated northern voters, for just when figures like Abraham Lincoln were glorifying free labor as the stepping-stone to real equality and personal improvement, southerners like Hammond mocked white workingmen as no better than slaves. Hearing his gibes, thousands of northerners became increasingly convinced that slave owners not only oppressed blacks but despised their own aspirations as well. A handful of white southerners criticized slavery in defiance of public opinion. Kentucky slaveholder James G. Birney freed his slaves, joined the American Anti-Slavery Society, and published an antislavery newspaper in Cincinnati. After breaking with William Lloyd Garrison over women’s rights, he served as presidential candidate for the Liberty Party in 1840. Birney made an ethical case against slavery, but southern critics more commonly avoided moralizing and blamed bondage for depressing the South’s economy and stifling opportunities for poor whites. North Carolinian Hinton Rowan Helper made this case most powerfully in his 1857 book *The Impending Crisis of the South: How to Meet It*. Coming from a yeoman piedmont family, Helper used elaborate statistical comparisons to prove that slavery grossly damaged the southern economy, but he directed his fiercest rhetoric against the political power of slaveholders. > “Too long have we yielded a submissive obedience to the tyrannical domination of an inflated oligarchy,” he railed, “too long have we tolerated their arrogance and self-conceit; too long have we submitted to their unjust and savage exactions. Let us now wrest from them the sceptre of power, establish liberty and equal rights throughout the land, and henceforth and forever guard our legislative halls from the pollutions and usurpations of proslavery demagogues.” Northerners who feared the expansion of slavery welcomed his words, but southerners responded with death threats, book burnings, and imprisonment of those who distributed his work. Especially after antislavery slavery politicians endorsed *The Impending Crisis*, Helper could no longer live in the South, and critics cited his treatment to prove that slave society could not tolerate freedom of speech. Adding references to Hammond and Fitzhugh and contemporary events, they made the broader case that slavery did more than mistreat blacks, for it inevitably undermined white rights too. This idea became the most powerful antislavery argument in the politics of the 1850s. --- # The World of the South, 1815–1860 The antebellum South was geographically and economically diverse, but its most important crop was short-staple cotton, heavily demanded by the booming textile industries of Europe and the North. Cotton culture expanded dramatically after 1815, created a market for the underused slaves of the Upper South, and ended hopes that slavery might die quietly. Instead, slavery grew stronger, inhibited the growth of southern cities and industry, and heightened differences with the North. Slavery imposed bitter toil and heartbreak, which African Americans continually resisted. It also encouraged a distinctive culture among whites, where status was associated with slave ownership and the power of command, where reform and women’s rights were limited, and where the demands of honor made compromise seem disgraceful. As criticism of slavery grew, white southerners mounted a defense that emphasized racism, literal readings of scripture, disdain for free labor, and occasional support for white inequality. While the slave and free states still had much in common, their diverging commitments to slavery and free labor inspired sharply opposing views on the meaning of republican liberty and the best ways to preserve it. --- FIGURE 8. Supporters of President Andrew Jackson praised his “Bank War” as the embodiment of democracy, but opponents denounced him as authoritarian and destructive. American Cartoon Print Filing Series, Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, LC-USZ62-809. --- # CHAPTER 11 ## The Transformation of Politics, 1815–1836 In the summer of 1834, a bitter and noisy election contest split the sleepy little river port of Fayetteville, North Carolina. The town’s businessmen longed for a railroad to bring them more customers, and their state representative had fought hard for a legislative subsidy. Success seemed guaranteed if the town remained united, so a sudden challenge to the incumbent legislator dumbfounded them. Two months before the balloting, a local newspaper announced that “the town election is to rest on Political grounds,” and “a Jackson man” would defy the little town’s establishment. General Andrew Jackson had been president for six stormy years when Fayetteville’s “Political” conflict broke out. Firmly rejecting the policies of his predecessor, John Quincy Adams, Jackson had systematically cut federal aid for the Market Revolution, including support for internal improvements and the Bank of the United States, and his policies had stirred raucous approval and furious opposition. There was no official connection between Jackson’s policies and the Fayetteville town election, but participants saw them as interdependent, with national issues reappearing at the village level. Village politicians thus set to work and organized rival campaigns linking Jackson’s opposition to the Bank with opposition to Fayetteville’s railroad subsidy. This was no transient squabble, moreover, for debate over economic change would dominate public discourse for decades. In Fayetteville and across the country, disputes between Democratic-Republicans (increasingly called “Democrats”), who supported President Jackson, and their opponents in “the Bank or Whig party” would dominate public life for the next two decades. Fayetteville’s contest raged all summer and the local papers rang with charges and countercharges. Some saw an older conflict re- --- appearing, like the Jacksonian who declared that "those who are opposed to the United States bank are as they have always been, republicans; those in its favor are as they have always been, *federalists,*" while Whigs denounced the president's policies as "violation[s] of Law . . . [with] a direct tendency to subvert the Constitution." Reaching out to voters who might ignore printed appeals, both parties held excited nightly meetings in every neighborhood, climaxed by a rollicking Whig ball on election eve. "Never had the old borough witnessed such excitement as on the day of the election," one participant recalled almost 60 years later. "Party distinctions were *strongly drawn,*" reported another, "and but few, if any men who voted at the election, left any doubt as to how they voted." Democrats wore pink ribbons and the Whigs sported blue ones. Marching bands led voters to party headquarters, where "liquor, from pure French [brandy] to mean whiskey, flowed freely." A railing separated rival camps at the polling place, but fights still exploded in the rising din, and a bloody duel almost resulted when a leading Whig answered a Jacksonian orator with a call for "three groans." When a general brawl erupted, one eager participant tried to join the fray by leaping from a balcony but landed on the ballot box instead, smashing the fragile symbol of republicanism as badly as Fayetteville's lost tranquility. The Whigs claimed a narrow victory when order returned, but the shattered ballot box remained an apt symbol for the fractured community. Fayetteville's future elections would not be quite so tumultuous, but Whigs and Democrats continued to dominate both local and national politics. The two sides kept using the same devices to stir up enthusiasm, moreover, from the speeches, newspapers, party ribbons, brass bands, and incessant rallies, to the liquor, the groans, and even the fights. In Fayetteville, the party rivalry was so intense that the two parties cancelled each other's influence, and the little town never got its railroad subsidy. Historians call the political rivalry that disrupted antebellum Fayetteville and the rest of the United States the Second American Party System to distinguish it from the contest between Thomas Jefferson's Democratic-Republicans and Alexander Hamilton's Federalists. It fittingly appeared in Fayetteville in a dispute over public support for a bank and a railroad, both vital engines of the Market Revolution. Throughout the United States, similar developments pushed against older principles of republicanism and generated conflicts that needed --- a public response. Most Whigs believed that the government should provide material support for economic development. Democrats worried that federal aid would enrich a privileged few at public expense and attack the liberty and equality that republicanism required. Today we recognize that “Jacksonian democracy” excluded American women, blacks, and Indians, but most contemporary leaders focused on the liberty of white men. The excluded would inherit their rhetoric and fight similar battles in later years. The Framers had detested parties, or “factions,” but the Electoral College made them almost inescapable. The need to win a majority pressured politicians to form two broad coalitions, each potentially large enough to succeed, and the need to unify these coalitions pushed supporters to sacrifice personal convictions for partisan success. The imperative of party unity distressed Americans who thought republican virtue depended on personal independence, especially Federalists and many Whigs, but most accepted it in the Second Party System. Thoughtful politicians knew that party divisions were inevitable but hoped to avoid a split over slavery, since that dispute could wreck the Union. They looked instead for political divisions that would focus popular energies without destroying the republic. They found what they wanted as citizens responded to the economic challenges of