return to Virginia, but sickened and died before the couple’s planned return. ### TOBACCO Pocahontas’s death did not interrupt John Rolfe’s experiments with a new crop that eventually secured Virginia’s future. Native Americans grew several varieties of the tobacco plant and used it widely in their ceremonies. Spaniards had taken up smoking in the Caribbean and Sir Walter Raleigh made it popular in Elizabeth’s court. The habit --- caught on quickly among the rich and fashionable, and soon there was a thriving market in Europe for the golden brown leaf. Virginia’s native tobacco was harsh to English throats, but Rolfe discovered that the milder Caribbean variety grew well at Jamestown, and he sold a large shipment in 1617 for the tidy sum of three shillings per pound. His fellow colonists scrambled to do likewise and planted tobacco everywhere they could, including the streets of Jamestown. Tobacco became so important that Virginians soon used it for money. Potential farmland was plentiful in Virginia but labor was not, and tobacco required enormous amounts of painstaking, backbreaking work. Fields were cleared by axe and fire and prepared for planting by the hoe. Seeds were nurtured in specially prepared beds until the delicate seedlings could be transplanted to a larger field. Workers hoed endlessly to control the weeds and nipped small shoots and flowers to force the growth of larger leaves. At harvest, whole plants were carefully cut and hung in large, open-air drying sheds until the leaves could be stripped and packed into barrels. All these tasks were done by hand, but with enough effort, even an inexperienced worker could raise between 500 and 1,000 pounds of tobacco per season, and enough corn to eat the following year. At prevailing prices in the 1610s and early 1620s, one worker’s crop could be worth as much as £100 in London, more money than most English laborers would see in a lifetime. Anyone who commanded the labor of many workers could gain a handsome fortune in a few short years. ### PLANTATIONS AND BOND SERVANTS Rolfe’s success sparked a clamor for tobacco workers, and the Virginia Company was happy to help. In 1619, a Dutch vessel arrived in Jamestown and exchanged a cargo of “twenty negars” for food, but we do not know if these first African Americans were held as slaves. More commonly, London officials scoured the docks and poorhouses for unemployed men and women cast adrift by the changing English economy, and offered them passage to Virginia in exchange for a term of service that ranged between four and seven years. They sealed these agreements with documents called indentures, much like apprenticeship contracts, so the laborers were called indentured servants. Most indentured servants were single men in their teens or early twenties, but some were women and some were much younger. Not all came voluntarily—some did not understand what they were signing --- and others were simply kidnapped. Once in the Chesapeake, however, their labor was the personal property of whoever owned their indentures, and they were sold to new masters from the decks of their ships. Until they had served out their terms, servants received no pay and minimal subsistence. They could be sold over and over, bequeathed in a will, or even lost in a card game. Runaways had to repay their masters with at least twice as much time as the length of their absences. Pregnancy cost a female servant two more years of bondage, and her child suffered servitude in turn until the age of 24—30 if the father was one of Virginia’s slowly growing number of Africans. Whipping was the punishment for disobedience or for running away, and little but the promise of eventual freedom, with the chance to grow tobacco on their own, distinguished their lives from those of slaves. The Virginia Company encouraged the tobacco boom by allowing settlers to create their own private farms. The company released its veteran employees and gave them each 100 acres of land. Anyone who paid to import a newcomer (either himself, a family member, or a servant) would receive a headright of 50 acres. Well-connected settlers could receive even larger grants, or purchase land for low prices and an annual fee, or quitrent. Responding eagerly, English settlers pressed up and down the James River and throughout the Chesapeake basin to find the best land. Much to the dismay of London authorities, they refused to live in compact towns or villages but scattered widely along the shore of the James and nearby creeks and rivers, with each planter shipping his tobacco to London from his own waterside dock. For centuries into the future, Virginia and the other southern colonies preferred scattered farms over towns and cities. Tobacco farmers (early Virginians called them all planters, whatever the size of their farms) who gained enough land and servants could become very wealthy. Many hoped to make enough in a few years to return to England, purchase an estate, and escape Virginia’s misery forever. This get-rich-quick objective encouraged masters to extract as much labor from their servants as they could, in the shortest possible time and at the lowest possible cost. The most nimble or unscrupulous succeeded in amassing large landholdings and numerous servants, laying the groundwork for a dominant class of wealthy plantation owners. Conditions on their estates were often brutal and life expectancies were very short. One young servant, Richard Frethorne, undoubtedly spoke for many in 1622 when he implored his parents to redeem him. “Wee must work hard both earlie, and late for a --- messe of water gruel and a mouthful of bread, and beife," he wrote them. "If you love me or respect me, as your Child release me from this bondage, and save my life." Frethorne’s pleas were ineffective, and he died within a year like so many others. One careful investigator of 1623 discovered that the Virginia Company had brought 3,570 settlers to its colony between 1619 and 1622, joining 700 who were living there already, but no more than 1,240 were left alive at the end of that three-year period. Important political changes coincided with the rise of tobacco culture. A new governor, Sir George Yeardley, arrived in 1619. He abandoned the “Lawes Divine, Morall and Martiall” and instead summoned a General Assembly, composed of his appointed Council and a House of Burgesses elected by the colonists, to make laws. In time, the Governor’s Council would function as an upper house of the colonial legislature while the House of Burgesses claimed the rights and roles of a colonial House of Commons. No one foresaw this in 1619, as America’s first representative assembly seemed to view itself as something like an English town council. The members took their duties very seriously, however, and spent several days in Jamestown’s church adopting a code of laws and regulations that settled matters from the prices of commodities to the penalties for swearing. ## Stabilizing the Chesapeake Tobacco production finally created the basis for stability and prosperity in Virginia, especially after the English government took over government from the Virginia Company. Crushing Indian resistance, the colonists re-created as much of English life as possible, including familiar forms of government, an established Anglican Church, and the presence of women and children. Unlike England, however, prosperity rested on the labor of bound workers and the creation of a plantation economy. Virginia was successful enough to inspire imitation in the nearby new colony of Maryland, but it also fostered severe social tensions that brought rebellion and a colonial civil war. ### INDIAN WARS AND ROYAL GOVERNMENT Powhatan died in 1617, just as the tobacco boom was taking off, and any traces of a mutually beneficial Indian-English relationship in Virginia died with him. As the English took more and more land for tobacco planting, his successor Opechancanough plainly saw the bal- --- ance of power tipping inexorably against his people and decided to strike while he could. On the morning of March 22, 1622, his men attacked without warning and slew 347 colonists in a matter of hours. The “massacre,” as white Virginians called it, wiped out one-third of the English population, but it was not enough to kill the colony. Virginians struck back ruthlessly, vowing to root the Powhatans “out from being longer a people uppon the face of the Earth.” Powhatan casualties soon exceeded English losses many times over, and sporadic warfare continued until 1632, leaving the tribe barely independent on a fragment of its former territory. The Powhatans struck once more in 1644, but they were far too weak for victory. Virginians captured and murdered the elderly Opechancanough, while the remnants of the once-powerful confederacy became tributary nations who lived peacefully inside the colony’s boundaries in exchange for annual payments and submission to English authority. Tributary Indians traded furs and skins for the English products they now relied on and helped the colonists fight other tribes. The prominent colonists who dominated the fur trade appreciated their presence, but ordinary whites frequently distrusted them and coveted their meager reservations. Virginia was beginning to succeed, but not the Virginia Company. It never turned a profit and the death rate stayed high, even though individuals prospered on their private plantations. Disgruntled directors complained to King James and appalled His Majesty with their tales of Indian attacks, wholesale death, and general incompetence. In 1623, English courts revoked the charter of the Virginia Company, shortly before the death of King James. Two years later, his son, King Charles I, proclaimed Virginia a royal colony. Royal government did not change Virginia much in the short term. The king appointed a governor and a council, and the governor became Virginia’s chief link to England’s monarchy. Grudgingly (for King Charles had no love of elected assemblies) the Crown continued to allow the freeholders, or landowners, of Virginia to select members of the House of Burgesses to represent them. Together, the Governor’s Council and the House of Burgesses formed a bicameral, or two-chambered, assembly for the passage of colonial laws. The governor and the Crown could both veto their bills. The result was not democracy, for the majority of Virginia’s residents were tenants, bound servants, or other dependents of established planters. Over time, however, Virginia’s House of Burgesses would become the institutional basis for an increasingly self-governing colony. --- The Assembly divided Virginia into counties and created an English system of local government. In each county, the governor installed a number of substantial planters as justices of the peace, with authority to settle minor local controversies without formality. Sitting together, the justices composed the county court, and met each month to try civil and criminal cases, issue licenses, regulate roads and taverns, supervise the collection of taxes, and generally transact the routine public business of the county. Like their English counterparts, the county justices were never elected, served virtually for life, and, in practice, used the power of recommendation to fill the vacancies in their own ranks. Able justices gained their peers’ respect and won election to the House of Burgesses, and the county courts became key institutions for cementing the power of Virginia’s planter gentry. Planters also ruled the colony’s Anglican Church. England’s national religion had always been legally established in Virginia, but few spared time for religion in the early years of the tobacco boom. As society gradually stabilized, the Assembly created an Anglican parish in each county and ordered a vestry, or committee of prominent laymen who were often justices of the peace, to impose taxes to support a church and a minister and provide local charity. Vestries did not always comply, but churches and Anglican clergy spread gradually over prosperous parishes. Inhabitants were required to attend church, and courts and vestries made conscientious efforts to punish immoral behavior. Like the county courts and the House of Burgesses, the Anglican Church became an important bulwark of the established order and Virginia’s dominant social class. ## ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL STABILITY The growth of stable institutions owed much to the passing of the tobacco boom. Tobacco prices fell as production rose, until almost everyone could afford the comfort of a pipe. Falling prices made overnight riches impossible, but the planter with plenty of hands could still become wealthy by remaining in the Chesapeake. More permanent settlers gradually built a society where a small and wealthy upper class controlled vast lands and tilled them with unfree workers whom they bought and sold at will. The majority of residents were small or middling planters who tilled their own fields with the help of their families. The outlines of a plantation society had emerged long before African slaves replaced white Englishmen in the tobacco fields. --- Lower profits made it harder to replace dying workers, so even the cruelest masters provided better food and living conditions by the 1640s. With better treatment, more servants survived to seek farms of their own, so settlement spread ever farther along the rivers and creeks of Virginia’s tidewater. As they moved inland, more Virginians escaped deadly marshes and bad water, and their lives grew even longer. Stability also brought more women to the colony. Only a handful of the first settlers had been female, most of them wives of senior commanders. Beginning in 1619, the Virginia Company sent over several boatloads of young single women, rightly expecting they would easily find husbands to pay for their passage. These women suffered from the same poor conditions and high death rates as male newcomers, but their numbers continued to grow. Female servants worked indoors more often than in the fields, but their hard work in the preparation and preservation of food and clothing was indispensable to the colony’s success. Female servants faced the threat of sexual abuse, but the unbalanced sex ratio gave poor women in Virginia much more freedom in the choice of marriage partners than they had in England. A high death rate created many widows, and fortunate women could radically raise their standing by marrying a succession of wealthy men and combining their estates. By English law, however, a husband had full control of his wife’s property, so men could also improve their fortunes by marriage to wealthy widows. As white Virginians began to marry, the sounds of their children’s games and voices mingled with the din of axes and the calls of working adults. The death rate remained higher in Virginia than in England for most of the seventeenth century, so many of these children died young. Most of the survivors lost one or both parents before reaching adulthood, but the presence of a rising generation was an unmistakable sign of Virginia’s growing success. Slowly and unconsciously, Virginians of the 1640s had transformed their settlement from an outpost into a home. ### MARYLAND JOINS VIRGINIA Imitation was another telling sign of success. In 1632, King Charles set off a separate colony on the northern shores of the Potomac River and Chesapeake Bay and called it Maryland in honor of his wife. He granted it to George Calvert, Lord Baltimore, a trusted councilor and tireless colonial promoter who had been active in the Virginia Com- --- pany and in plans for a colony in Newfoundland. Maryland was a proprietary colony whose owner held full rights to govern as he saw fit, so long as his laws did not conflict with England’s. George Calvert died before the grant was complete, but his son Cecilius Calvert became the next Lord Baltimore and first Lord Proprietor of Maryland, developing his colony on familiar lines. Maryland’s economy, like Virginia’s, depended on tobacco. Those who brought in new settlers got headrights of land and could purchase more, but owed an annual quitrent in return. Most of the early workers were indentured servants, joined by a sprinkling of slaves. The proprietor appointed the governor, but an elected assembly made the province’s laws and county courts administered local government. As in Virginia, a small group of wealthy landowning planters dominated society and government. Religion formed the greatest difference between Maryland and Virginia. The Calverts were Roman Catholics when most English Protestants still regarded so-called papists as potential enemies of the state and supported strict laws that discriminated harshly against them. The Calverts were mainly interested in Maryland for economic reasons, but they also wanted a haven for their fellow Catholics. England would not have allowed an exclusively Catholic settlement, but Cecilius Calvert protected his coreligionists by refusing to establish an official church and allowing all professing Christians complete freedom to worship as they chose. The Maryland Assembly ratified the policy of toleration with its Act Concerning Religion in 1649, the first law guaranteeing religious freedom for competing denominations of English Christians. As expected, most Marylanders were nominal Anglicans, but their church remained weak without public funds or official support. Radical Protestants found safe havens in Maryland when they faced persecution in Virginia. The Catholic population remained small but enjoyed a disproportionate share of wealth and political influence. At the end of the seventeenth century, religious and political tensions led Maryland Protestants to defy the Calverts and revoke religious liberty, but until then, the colony demonstrated the feasibility of toleration to the rest of the English world. ### BACON’S REBELLION A violent uprising in 1676 marked the end of Virginia’s founding era. By the early 1670s, a ring of counties pressed out from the shores of the --- Chesapeake to the fall line, a band of rapids that blocked river passage from the coastal plain or tidewater to the piedmont uplands. Beyond the fall line, the powerful Susquehannocks dominated diverse Indian peoples who surrounded white settlements from a distance, jockeying with colonists and each other for access to trade and safeguards for their independence. Within the white settlements, wealthy planters held most of the best land but depended heavily on the labor of large numbers of discontented servants. Governor William Berkeley and his closest friends enriched themselves with the Indian trade and used their offices for private gain. Ordinary planters complained bitterly of official corruption and the high taxes that top officials did not have to pay, and declining tobacco prices often blighted their dreams of security. Freed servants pressed westward beyond them and collided with the first tier of Indian inhabitants. Often landless, freed servants could be just as discontented as bound ones. Senior officials worried that they were "pressed at our backs with the Indians [and] in our bowells with our servants," and could not tell which group would be more dangerous. The tension snapped in 1675, when a dispute between whites and Doeg Indians took the lives of some innocent Susquehannocks and ignited a war between their tribe and the Virginians, who promptly split into factions. Hoping to contain the conflict and return to profitable trading, Governor Berkeley would only attack Susquehannocks and asked the Assembly for an expensive line of defensive forts. This decision disgusted backcountry farmers who did not trade with Indians but feared them all. They preferred a full-scale war against all Indians that would pay for itself through the sale of captives. When the governor refused again, an obscure young gentleman named Nathaniel Bacon stepped forward as popular champion. Bacon had just arrived in Virginia as a high-born but restless young man of 27 and readily agreed to lead a force of angry settlers against all Indians, concentrating on the peaceful tributary tribes and avoiding the more dangerous Susquehannocks. Aroused by Bacon’s defiance, a new Assembly passed reforms to empower ordinary settlers and clean up official corruption. When Governor Berkeley resisted, the insurgents burned Jamestown and looted the plantations of his wealthiest supporters. Violence suddenly collapsed in October 1676, when Bacon took sick and the rebellion died with him, but his followers had already defeated most Virginia tribes, allies and enemies alike. Defeat removed restrictions on the Indian slave trade, and warring southern tribes sold the English as many as 30,000–50,000 captives in the next --- generation. Berkeley retaliated by hanging 23 rebels and annulling their reforms, but the Crown decided he had acted too harshly. When a royal commission arrived to soothe the shattered colony, Berkeley lost his job, returned to England, and died soon afterward. Bacon’s Rebellion uncovered deep rifts in Virginia’s social fabric. White farmers were clearly enraged by their subordinate position in Virginia society. They might seek vengeance by attacking people they saw as radically different, especially those of another color, but they could also turn against their social superiors. In the future, great planters who longed for social stability would treat the complaints of small farmers with greater sensitivity. Planters would also benefit when racial hostility between poor whites and black slaves obscured class differences among whites, and when enslaved plantation workers could not become free and rebel. In the generation after 1676, Indian slaves were not enough, so Virginia’s great planters gradually replaced their indentured servants with African victims of a growing Atlantic slave trade. The imperial government also resolved to keep Virginia and its other colonies under tighter central control. ## Puritan America The English settlers of Virginia had reacted to the economic and social disruption of their homeland by looking to America for economic opportunity. Facing similar pressures, other English people saw a moral and spiritual crisis that they hoped to reverse by creating a more perfect church and commonwealth in America. Contemporaries called these men and women Puritans, because they wished to purify the English church and nation of deep-seated corruption that they blamed on persisting remnants of Roman Catholicism. Beginning on the margins of the Church of England, Puritans would lead the settlement of the New England colonies and briefly take control of the English government. Their ideals and values would leave a lasting mark on the culture and politics of the United States. ### THE PURITAN FAITH Puritanism was not a clear-cut sect or denomination, but a broad religious movement among English men and women who worried that the Church of England had not done enough to rid the nation of sin or itself of Catholic