and the same smallpox epidemic may have spread as far as California before subsiding. By 1548, a veteran Spanish colonist estimated that the population of Hispaniola had fallen from as many as 300,000 Indians to no more than 500. Disease was not the only cause, however, for wars between Europeans and Native Americans also took countless lives. Anxious for labor and profits, colonists subjected survivors to cruelty, malnutrition, and overwork, leading to even more casualties. As late as 1715, a flourishing Indian slave trade spread deadly violence through southeast North America. Disease and exploitation could work together, moreover, since people weakened by hunger and overwork were more likely to get sick and die. It is quite possible that trade, slaving, and warfare conducted or inspired by English settlers spread far more germs among Indians than the marches of Spanish conquistadors. Over time, moreover, some Indian groups would begin to grow again, and keep a large presence in eastern North America well into the nineteenth century. Experts dispute whether the transfer of diseases worked in reverse, bringing new ailments from America to Europe. Syphilis may have crossed the Atlantic with the crews of Columbus, for its first European outbreak coincided with their return in 1494. Contemporary physicians thought it came from America, and there is archaeological evidence that the disease had long existed among the Indians. The infection quickly spread along routes of commerce and warfare, and like smallpox among the Indians, it brought agony and relatively rapid death to previously unexposed populations. For centuries after the arrival of Columbus, epidemic diseases re- --- peatedly swept through Indian communities, often far in advance of the Europeans themselves. Smallpox was the worst killer, but waves of measles, influenza, typhus, cholera, scarlet fever, diphtheria, and even bubonic plague were almost as bad. The epidemics played a crucial role in sweeping native peoples from the colonists’ path and breaking the morale of the survivors. In the southeastern United States, most of the chiefdoms visited by de Soto had vanished by the time Europeans revisited his line of march, while the Pilgrims discovered that a deadly plague had almost wiped out the Indians of coastal Massachusetts shortly before their arrival in 1620. “They not being able to bury one another,” reported William Bradford, governor of the Plymouth colony, “their skulls and bones were found in many places lying still above the ground where their houses and dwellings had been, a very sad spectacle to behold.” The statistics of Native American population and depopulation have very important implications. North America was not an empty continent in 1492, waiting to be filled by European colonizers. Instead, its population density probably exceeded the definition of “frontier” later adopted by the US Census Bureau. The drama of the earliest “frontier,” therefore, was not acted out between civilized Europeans and an empty wilderness, but in a vibrant zone of interaction between diverse cultures. Without knowing the true cause of infection, moreover, less vulnerable Europeans readily attributed the Indians’ decline to divine providence, and Native Americans at times feared that their own gods had deserted them. ### THE COLUMBIAN EXCHANGE Deadly germs were not the only organisms to follow Columbus across the Atlantic, for a “Columbian exchange” of living things brought many varieties of plants and animals from each hemisphere to the farmers and consumers of the other. As food for people and animals alike, maize began spreading across southern Europe in the sixteenth century and soon reached Africa before expanding worldwide. Domesticated by Andean Indians, white potatoes fed millions of Europeans from Ireland to Russia by the eighteenth century and kept expanding thereafter. Sweet potatoes from South America spread almost as widely. The manioc root (also called cassava or tapioca) migrated from South America to the fields of Africa, India, and Indonesia, as farmers carefully copied the technique for removing its deadly poison first de- --- veloped by Amazonian Indians. The world’s cooks embraced American varieties of beans and also took up peanuts, squash, pumpkins, and tomatoes, together with delicacies like pineapple and chocolate. Native Americans also gave the world tobacco and the most widely cultivated variety of cotton. In the opposite direction, the Western Hemisphere imported major species of domestic animals from the east. Native Americans kept dogs, llamas, turkeys, and guinea pigs, but Europeans added cows, horses, pigs, and sheep. The availability of horses especially transformed the lives of buffalo hunters on the North American Great Plains and strengthened many tribes militarily. Rats were far less welcome immigrants. Colonists also brought their favorite plants to America, especially wheat and sugarcane, and both became very profitable staples. They also planted European fruits and vegetables in their American gardens. Bananas spread from Asia to Africa and followed the slave trade to the Caribbean. Rice took a similar path from Africa to South Carolina and Georgia, and southeastern Indians learned to plant peach orchards. Inedible plants crossed the Atlantic as well, from grasses and ornamental flowers to dandelions. The vast transfer of organisms from each hemisphere greatly increased the world’s production of food, providing essential nutrition as human population doubled between 1650 and 1800, and radically altering ecosystems throughout the planet. ### UNDERSTANDING AMERICA The encounter with America presented learned Europeans with a series of profound intellectual challenges. The scholars of medieval Europe had little direct contact with the outside world, but they knew about Africans and Asians and argued theology with Muslims and Jews, so these different societies puzzled them far less than reports of an entirely “new world.” They wondered why America was completely unmentioned in the Bible, the foundation of all human knowledge. Why had God allowed almost 1,500 years to pass before permitting its inhabitants to hear the Christian gospel? Observers of the natural world likewise wondered at the enormous diversity of American plants and animals, and the differences between the species of each hemisphere. They noticed that the commonest animals of Europe—from chickens to war-horses—were completely unknown in America, but America contained an astonishing variety of species that seemed completely new. Had all these creatures wandered from the landing --- place of Noah’s ark to different continents without leaving any traces along the way? The biological questions would puzzle Europeans for centuries, until Charles Darwin proposed his answers. More urgent questions concerned the American Indians. Theologians seriously debated whether Indians were truly human beings with souls who could convert to Christianity, or animals or devils in human form. If they were indeed human, should they be forced to accept Christianity, as Ferdinand and Isabella had demanded of the Jews and Muslims of Spain? Were compulsory labor and the seizure of Indian lands necessary for spreading the Christian faith? The conquistadors themselves spent little time on such issues. They were already accustomed to combating and enslaving non-Christian peoples, and they did not question their rights to American land and gold. Some of the Catholic clergy who came with them were more sensitive, however, and pushed for answers to difficult questions. As early as 1511, the Dominican monk Fray Antonio de Montesinos had outraged the rulers of Hispaniola by denouncing their treatment of the Indians. “Are these not men?” he demanded. “Have they not rational souls? Must you not love them as you love yourselves?” Pope Paul III agreed, and declared in 1537 that “the Indians are truly men and that they are not only capable of understanding the Catholic Faith but, according to our information, they desire exceedingly to receive it.” But what if the Indians rejected Christianity? Fray Bartolomé de Las Casas, who grew up on Hispaniola and became the bishop of Chiapas, Mexico, denounced the use of violence and the *encomienda* system to force the conversion of Indians. In his voluminous writings, Las Casas protested Spanish cruelty to Native Americans so powerfully that King Charles I (also known as Emperor Charles V of the Holy Roman Empire) convened a special council in 1550 to thrash out the lawfulness of compulsory labor and conversion. Held in the Spanish city of Valladolid, this extraordinary debate over Indian policy pitted Las Casas against another monk, Fray Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda, but ended inclusively. As a practical matter, the Spanish government halted the worst abuses of the *encomienda* system but still required labor tribute from conquered Indians. When Spanish demands for labor exceeded the local supply, they substituted African slaves for Indian workers, a policy Las Casas first supported but later opposed. Since the Spanish had long bought and sold Africans at home, their enslavement in America apparently touched fewer consciences. Las Casas was not alone in defending the humanity of Native Ameri --- cans. Some Renaissance thinkers praised the Indians as innocent “noble savages” whose natural virtues mocked the vices of civilized Christians, though exaggerated accounts of Indian innocence were as unrealistic as contrasting reports of Indian savagery. In a famous book of essays published in 1580, Frenchman Michel de Montaigne described Brazilian Indians who lived in a land of plenty, shared all their possessions in common, and spent their days hunting and dancing. Europeans called these Indians barbarous, he observed, but only because their customs were unfamiliar. Montaigne admitted that visitors called the Brazilians cannibals, but he mocked the moral pretensions of Europe by dryly observing that eating prisoners was kinder than torturing them, as Europeans did in their wars of religion. “We may then call these people barbarous, in respect to the rules of reason,” he concluded, “but not in respect to ourselves, who in all sorts of barbarity exceed them.” Few Europeans were willing to go so far as Montaigne in comparing themselves to alleged cannibals, but America still challenged their sense of superiority and forced them to reckon with a vaster range of human possibilities than they had ever known before. If America was inferior to Europe, then the empire builders felt obliged to uplift it, perhaps by civilizing and Christianizing the Indians. If the Indians were somehow superior to their conquerors, then Europeans might justify their conquest by the creation of new societies that corrected the deficiencies of Europe and America. The Spanish responded to the moral challenge of America with fervent efforts to convert the Indians, but they were not the only colonizers to feel a moral imperative. English religious reformers revealed similar emotions when they chose a symbol for their colony on Massachusetts Bay: the image of a half-naked Indian calling, “Come over and help us.” The utopian pressure represented by that symbol would continue its potent influence on the nation that the English colonists created. * The Native Americans were complex and diverse peoples whose histories were 15,000 years old in 1492. Their lifestyles ranged from simple hunting and gathering to large urban civilizations, and they had developed a wide variety of cultural practices, from archery to agriculture to building stone pyramids. Most North American social structures were less complex than those of Mexico and Peru, but from the --- Pueblos to the Mississippians, many of its people created impressive urban settlements and intricate social hierarchies. The European explorers who first encountered these Indians came from other complex cultures that suddenly expanded in the fifteenth century. Driven by a craving for Asian luxuries, a lust for gold, an immense curiosity, a yearning to save souls, and a fierce competition with each other and their Muslim rivals, European Christians began the voyages to West Africa that eventually led them to America. Soon after their arrival, Europeans combined slavery with plantation agriculture in a system that would profoundly shape the history of America, Europe, and Africa. The invasion of Indian societies, the enslavement of Africans, and the founding of colonial empires was not a one-sided process of subjugation. The experience brought Europeans, Indians, and Africans close together for the first time and launched a course of interaction and exchange that would create new societies with fundamental contributions from all three. It was a highly unequal development in which Europeans benefited from stronger governments and economic systems, as well as superior weapons, and resistance to deadly epidemics. But Native Americans exerted their own pressures on Europeans and did not leave the colonists unmoved or unscathed. When Columbus died in 1506, the physical and cultural demands of empire building had just begun. --- FIGURE 1. Colonizing Europeans depicted Native Americans in widely diverging ways to reflect both their fantasies and their fears. A, Theodor de Bry, *Columbus, as he first arrives in India, is received by the inhabitants and honored with the bestowing of many gifts*, 1594. Engraving. Theodor de Bry’s America, Special Collections, University of Houston Libraries, accessed November 11, 2016, http://digital.lib.uh.edu/collection/p15195coll39/item/84. B, Matthaus Merian, after a work by Theodor de Bry, *The Massacre of the Jamestown Settlers*, 1634. Engraving. John D. Rockefeller Jr. Library, Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, accession no. 1986-15, image no. C86-461. --- # CHAPTER 2 ## The First English Colonies, 1584–1676 The captured Englishman stared death in the face. Guards pinned his head on two large stones as mighty executioners raised their clubs, awaiting the king’s signal to dash his brains out. After a life of escapades that stretched from England to Turkey to Russia, was this bold adventurer really about to die at the far end of the earth, at the hands of half-naked strangers? No, not yet. The king’s favorite daughter suddenly rushed forward and cradled the captive’s head in her arms. John Smith was spared. Pocahontas’s rescue of Captain John Smith is one of the most melodramatic stories in American memory, the subject of endless retellings in print and on-screen. As Smith recalled some 20 years later, the incident took place in December 1607, eight months after a tiny contingent of Englishmen reached the shores of Chesapeake Bay in a country they called Virginia. Assuming leadership of a weak and bitterly divided band of colonists, Smith had gone to the local Indians for desperately needed food. Instead of trading, however, the Indians seized Smith and took him to their leader Powhatan, whom the English called an emperor. Smith certainly thought Powhatan had decided to put him to death when Pocahontas intervened and allowed him to obtain the food he had come for. But what had really happened? Pocahontas was no more than 13 years old at the time, and probably less. Had she fallen in love with this bearded stranger, as mythmakers have imagined? Did Providence move Powhatan to compassion, as Smith later concluded? Both explanations are unlikely. Instead, the resourceful chief probably arranged the outcome in advance. Ever since their arrival, the feeble band of Englishmen had troubled Powhatan’s people with endless demands for food that were especially --- hard to satisfy because recent crops had withered in a massive drought. But the English had also brought valuable objects for trade—iron tools to fight Powhatan’s enemies and exotic materials like cloth and bells to impress them. Powhatan had decided that the English could stay, but they must learn his rules and join the government he had worked for decades to create. Smith’s mock execution was probably an initiation ceremony that brought him to the brink of death and allowed him to be reborn symbolically as a dependent who owed the chief his life. Following his supposed rescue, Powhatan adopted Smith as his son, gave him an Indian name, and proclaimed him a *werowance*, or local chief. Henceforth, Powhatan would expect Smith to govern the English as a subordinate tribe, free to manage their internal affairs but subject to his ultimate authority. Ten months later, it was Powhatan’s turn to be initiated. Captain Christopher Newport arrived from England with badly needed supplies, and imposed the emperor’s policy in reverse by proclaiming Powhatan a subordinate chief under the authority of King James I of England. Newport carried a copper crown to symbolize the new relationship, but the proud chief refused to cooperate. Finally the exasperated Newport pushed down on Powhatan’s shoulders and forced him to stoop low enough to get the circlet on his head. In a more familiar ceremony, the two leaders exchanged gifts. Among other items, Powhatan received a scarlet cloak and gave Newport his beaded deerskin mantle in return. Today the mantle rests in an English museum, a pointed reminder of the mutual incomprehension between Englishmen and Indians. Neither John Smith nor Powhatan understood or accepted their initiations. Certainly neither one had knowingly agreed to subject himself to the other. Each ceremony was an effort to manage radically different people by assigning them familiar roles. No matter how clumsy, the rituals also embodied hopes for peaceful—though unequal—cooperation between Indians and Englishmen. These hopes were sadly doomed to fail, not only from misunderstanding but also because the two sides’ purposes were fundamentally at odds. Some months after his coronation ceremony, Powhatan put his finger on the problem when he told Smith that “many do informe me, your coming is not for trade, but to invade my people and possesse my Country.” Despite the niceties of initiation ceremonies, the prediction proved true, not only in Virginia but also farther north, in a region that John Smith had named New England. --- The English would extend a chain of colonies up and down the Atlantic seaboard by the end of the seventeenth century, with even more valuable sugar colonies sprinkled among the Caribbean islands. On the mainland, the Chesapeake colonies of Virginia and Maryland came first and flourished from the cultivation of tobacco. These colonies depended on plantation agriculture and forced labor, first with English laborers and later with African slaves. New England sheltered religious dissidents called Puritans, who established an economy based on family farms, small villages, and active commerce. The Puritans hoped to create an ideal Christian community and left an enduring mark on secular and religious culture in the United States. Both sets of colonies reflected important aspects of English society, and both fought bitterly with Indian neighbors like Powhatan, but the contrasts between them became at least as important as the similarities. ## England and the Atlantic The movements that brought John Smith and Powhatan together were part of a vortex of changes in the seventeenth century that transformed people all around the basin of the Atlantic Ocean. Whatever their hemisphere, almost all ancient and medieval people had seen the Atlantic as an impassable barrier, far too dangerous to cross. The sixteenth-century explorers had shown instead that the Atlantic could be a bridge or even a highway. Joined by a sprinkling of other Europeans, the Spanish and Portuguese had crossed this bridge to contact other Atlantic peoples and, often, to sweep them into colonial empires. As the sixteenth century became the seventeenth, several nations of northern Europe, notably England, France, and the Netherlands, challenged Spain and Portugal by using the ocean to greatly expand their contacts with Africa and America. The inhabitants of Africa and America responded in a variety of ways—sometimes by seeking to repel the newcomers and sometimes by enlisting them in their own alliances, but often by agreeing to trade with them, swapping exotic products that the Europeans craved for goods the Europeans could provide. The result was a crisscross of relationships around a new Atlantic world that brought together diverse people who were previously unknown to one another. These relationships brought a dramatic increase of commerce and interaction, as well as a heightened scramble for empire. Commerce and new empires did not expand in a vacuum, for religious changes had also swept through sixteenth-century Europe. Be- --- ginning in the early sixteenth century, the Protestant Reformation split Christians into warring camps that pitted Protestant England against Catholic Spain, and various Protestants against each other. Together, these quarrels interacted with economic and political rivalries to affect the drive for colonization, and especially influenced the English settlements that rose in eastern North America and later became the United States. The forces that brought John Smith and Powhatan to their twin initiations were thus much larger than either could fully comprehend. # A NEW ATLANTIC WORLD For most of the sixteenth century, the Spanish and Portuguese kept the business of Atlantic trade and empire for themselves. Even before Columbus, the Spanish learned the colonial enterprise by conquering the Canary Islands off the African coast, enslaving most of the natives, and forcing them to make sugar. After the voyages of Columbus, they repeated the pattern on the major Caribbean islands, but then concentrated on the mainland when the mines of Mexico and Peru proved even more profitable than plantations. As provided in the Treaty of Tordesillas, the Portuguese built a different kind of empire by continuing to send voyages southward along the African coast. After Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope in 1497, other Portuguese commanders pressed onward to the Southeast Asian islands where the spices originated, and built strings of forts and trading posts behind them that reached as far as Africa, India, Southeast Asia, and China and Japan. By sailing south and east they finally found the water route to Asia that Columbus had sought by sailing west. Portugal also took advantage of its treaty rights to develop a colony in Brazil, first as a source of material for making dye and later for sugar plantations. Like the Spanish in the Caribbean, they began with Indian labor before turning to African slaves. To find them, the Portuguese converted their Gold Coast fort of Elmina to slave trading, expanded their contacts with the West Central African kingdom of the Kongo, and laid the groundwork for a colony farther south, in Angola. Portugal dominated the first century of the Atlantic slave trade, sending as many as 650,000 Africans to America before 1640. The kingdoms of northwestern Europe watched with growing concern as the Spanish and Portuguese empires grew, especially