Panic of 1837 stemmed from international factors that were not comprehended by most American politicians and largely beyond their control in any case. The main political effect of the panic was to reinforce existing opinions about financial policy and strengthen the party lines that had already formed in the Jackson administration. The economic effects of the panic were painful and lingering, how- --- ever. A weak recovery in 1838 led to an even deeper collapse in 1839. Pennsylvania’s Bank of the United States became a conspicuous casualty, closing its doors at last in 1841. Times remained hard until well into the 1840s, as farmers lost their lands, merchants and shop owners faced bankruptcy, banks slashed their lending, and many states could not repay the funds they had borrowed for massive projects of internal improvement. Within these states, Whigs blamed Democrats for destroying the public credit, but Democrats denounced the whole scheme of reckless economic development they identified with Whiggery, refusing to charter new corporations and sometimes seeking to abolish the banking industry altogether. At the federal level, President Van Buren rejected Whig demands that he act to revive the economy. Insisting that he lacked the constitutional power to intervene, Van Buren declared that the depression should run its course, forcing dishonest and reckless operators out of business and purging the nation of corruption. Honest Americans who sought no easy riches but labored hard to feed their families from the products of their own farms or workshops, he suggested, would not be touched by fluctuations in market prices and were thus immune from the depression’s worst effects. Van Buren did worry, however, that federal funds now lay trapped in private banks that paid unredeemable paper notes instead of specie. His solution called for the creation of the Independent Treasury in order to enact a “divorce” between the government and the banks. Summoning Congress into special session in the fall of 1837, he asked for authorization to keep the government’s money completely out of banks and to lodge it in regional government offices called sub-treasuries instead. Whigs resisted furiously, realizing that the banks used the government’s deposits to make profitable loans in the credit-starved economy. If the government withdrew its money from the banking system, these loans would disappear, credit would become even scarcer, and recovery would be that much more difficult. Dismissing Whig arguments as a smoke screen from greedy bankers who only wanted to feast on the people’s money, Democrats sided with the president but could not deliver enough votes. Van Buren spent most of his single term struggling patiently for the Independent Treasury. When he finally won it in 1840, the prize was politically useless, for hard times had scarcely abated and Whigs looked forward to the next election with undisguised jubilation. --- # "TIPPECANOE AND TYLER TOO" Confident of success, Whigs assembled their own convention in December 1839. Party stalwart Henry Clay longed for the nomination, but unsentimental power brokers realized that his enemies were too numerous and chose William Henry Harrison instead. To balance the ticket, they named John Tyler of Virginia as his running mate. Tyler was a conservative planter with Old Republican leanings who had gravitated to the Whigs for fear of Jackson’s bellicose stand on nullification, but Whigs gave his opinions little thought as they organized for victory. Embellishing the methods that Democrats had long used to enliven their own campaigns, Whigs gathered in enormous rallies for “Tippecanoe and Tyler Too” and derided “Little Van” as a “used up man.” Popularizing a deathless expression, they proclaimed that the country would be “O.K.,” or “Oll Korrect,” when the “Little Magician” was finally sent “off to Kinderhook,” his New York home. A Democratic newspaperman handed the Whigs an indispensable symbol when he dismissed their aging candidate as a doddering old fool who would rather sit by the fire in a log cabin and sip hard cider than run the country. In fact, Martin Van Buren had risen from obscurity, while Harrison was a Virginia planter’s son whose father signed the Declaration of Independence. Gleeful Whigs ignored these facts and trumpeted their man as “the log cabin candidate” who shared the dwelling of the poor and contented himself with simple cider while Van Buren rioted in White House luxury. Whigs drenched themselves with the exhilarating beverage, pushed ten-foot leather balls across the country to “keep the ball rolling” for Harrison, and put up log cabins everywhere to symbolize their campaign, even in the heart of Manhattan. Without success, frustrated Democrats denounced these stunts as deceptive nonsense. Aroused by fierce party competition and irresistible entertainment, an astonishing 78 percent of eligible voters came to the polls and handed William Henry Harrison the victory. “They have at last learned from defeat the art of victory,” the *Democratic Review* admitted. “We have taught them how to conquer us!” Harrison won a landslide in the Electoral College, 234 votes to 60, and 53.1 percent of the popular vote. Previous elections had been lopsided contests within most states, but the parties in 1840 were strongly competitive almost everywhere. Nearly every citizen could see that his own vote mattered, and party operatives struggled to bring every last voter to the polls. The Second Party System had reached its matu --- rity, and party competition had brought its restricted electorate to an astonishing level of political participation. Whig euphoria did not last long. Seeking perhaps to dispel Democratic charges that he was too old and frail to be president, Harrison stood in a raw March wind without an overcoat to deliver the longest inaugural address in American history. In the following weeks, he trudged through Washington’s slushy streets until he fell ill. Four weeks after he took the oath of office, President William Henry Harrison was dead of pneumonia, and Vice President John Tyler took his place. Tyler immediately had trouble, for he had virtually no personal support in the country and was neither an orthodox Whig nor Democrat at a time when party support had become essential for political success. Whigs in the Capitol followed Senator Henry Clay, but President Tyler had no sympathy for Clay’s unchanged plans for an activist federal government. Under Clay’s leadership, Congress repealed Van Buren’s Independent Treasury and twice rechartered a national bank. Tyler consented to the Treasury bill but vetoed the bank charters, forcing the government to leave its funds in unreliable state banks. Tyler also clashed with Congress over taxes, for the combined effects of the depression and the tariff reductions of 1833 had thrust the government into a revenue crisis. Tyler reluctantly agreed that the tariff had to go up again, but he drew the line against Clay’s proposal to allow the distribution of the proceeds of public lands for the purposes of internal improvement. Infuriated by Tyler’s rejection of the doctrines that voters had apparently endorsed in 1840, congressional Whigs denounced the president, and all of Harrison’s cabinet appointees resigned except Secretary of State Daniel Webster. When Webster completed work on the Webster-Ashburton Treaty, settling the US border with Canada, he too quit and left President John Tyler with no more than a “corporal’s guard” of states’ rights southerners to keep him company. The Jacksonian political system seemed deeply entrenched by the presidential election of 1844. National party conventions chose both major candidates, party organizations dominated the campaign process from the presidential contest down to local battles among legislators and aldermen, party newspapers spelled out the respective platforms, and the contest was close in virtually every state. Having originated in a bitter controversy over the tension between republican traditions and new demands for economic programs, the parties --- had shown they could adapt to additional concerns and offer voters a meaningful choice on other issues such as Texas annexation. The power of the Second Party System proved ephemeral, however. Over the next two decades, Americans would find that the slavery issue was not so easily quieted as the question of a national bank, and the policy of geographical expansion would drive that controversy beyond the power of the Second Party System to control. The process began when Polk pursued the consequences of Texas annexation. ### THE EMERGENCE OF MANIFEST DESTINY In July of 1845, New York Democratic editor John L. O’Sullivan coined a memorable phrase in an article proclaiming the United States’ “manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.” Other writers and speakers latched on to “manifest destiny,” for the words seemed to encapsulate a popular conviction that American territorial expansion was natural, inevitable, and glorious, and would eventually embrace the entire North American continent. O’Sullivan himself had long promoted this idea in his journal, the *United States Magazine and Democratic Review*. There he insisted that America was unique among all nations, its universal democratic principles would exempt it from prior human ills, and its future would be the salvation of all mankind. “The far-reaching, the boundless future will be the era of American greatness,” O’Sullivan had predicted in 1839. > In its magnificent domain of space and time, the nation of many nations is destined to manifest to mankind the excellence of divine principles; to establish on earth the noblest temple ever dedicated to the worship of the Most High—the Sacred and the True. Its floor shall be a hemisphere—its roof the firmament of the star-studded heavens, and its congregation an Union of many Republics, comprising hundreds of happy millions, calling, owning no man master, but governed by God’s natural and moral law of equality, the law of brotherhood—of “peace and good will amongst men.” O’Sullivan’s enthusiasm was grandiose even in the 1840s, but similar sentiments spread widely. White Americans had long imagined themselves as a people set apart from others and distinguished with a special mission. While Puritans had conceived this mission in religious --- terms, Jacksonian Americans like O’Sullivan found sacred meaning in a republican crusade. To the distant nations of Europe, America might lead by the force of its example. Within the Western Hemisphere, however, O’Sullivan and many of his fellow Democrats foresaw a policy of expansion that would bring distant territories under the rule of American democracy and open them to a spreading population of white Americans. Like O’Sullivan, many expressed this hope with spread-eagle optimism, but others warned that America must expand or shrivel, and that the security of its people and its institutions depended on the subjection of supposedly inferior neighbors, particularly Mexicans and Native Americans. During the 1840s, O’Sullivan’s version of American nationalism seized the public imagination, and “Manifest Destiny” became a powerful political slogan that legitimized a quest for continental empire. As Americans extended their institutions to the Pacific, however, a virulent question took over the public debate. Whose institutions would move west—the North’s or the South’s? Would O’Sullivan’s “law of brotherhood” make room for slavery? Or was the republic’s growth inseparable from the spread of human property? Whether slave or free, didn’t the destiny of the United States depend on the fate of its Great West? Eventually Americans could not evade these questions, but they began the debate over territorial expansion in the conventional way, within the structure of the two-party system, and consequently, by attempting to downplay the sectional implications of continental growth. # The Great West What was the land that Americans coveted in the 1840s? Who lived there already? Beyond the Mississippi floodplain, the North American continent sloped upward beneath a vast sea of grass and scrubland to the crest of the Rocky Mountains. The true deserts of the Great Basin came next, followed by more ranges that lined the Pacific coast. This vast sweep of territory became the object and the prize of Manifest Destiny. Its harsh landscape initially intimidated eastern travelers, who labeled it the “Great American Desert.” In fact, the Great Plains had been as much a highway as an obstacle to those who knew how to cross it, and had long offered pathways for Indians, Spaniards, traders, trappers, and wildlife. After centuries of dispute between Native Americans and multiple European empires, claims to the vast region --- from the 49th parallel to the 31st at the Rio Grande, and then down the river to the Gulf of Mexico, would fall to the United States in the decades before the Civil War and make the former seaboard colonies a transcontinental republic. For well over a century, the struggle to occupy and subdue this territory bred myths and folklore about western expansion and American identity. More immediately, the American drive to possess the West would displace its earlier inhabitants. ## GEOGRAPHY AND EARLY PEOPLES The West’s many regions varied widely from each other and supported diverse human cultures. On the Pacific coast, food sources were so abundant that native peoples practiced little agriculture and lived almost entirely by hunting and gathering. Acorns were the favorite food of the California Indians. Rivers in the rainy forests of the Pacific Northwest attracted annual swarms of salmon, which members of the Chinook, Kwakiutl, Haida, and Tlingit tribes harvested and dried to last all year. Living from Puget Sound to southwest Alaska, these tribes established elaborate hierarchies of social class, built wooden plank houses, and produced highly distinctive art to cover their dwellings, clothes, boats, ritual objects, and the monumental carvings that whites called totem poles. In the southwestern desert, where the upper Rio Grande flows south before turning eastward to the Gulf, ancestors of the Pueblo Indians had been among the first to adopt the culture of maize, or corn, from Central America. Benefiting from ingenious systems to catch every available drop of rainwater, maize supported elaborate towns made of stone and adobe brick, safely perched on mesa tops or cliff faces, or tucked away deep in protected canyons. Not far away, the Navaho people also farmed and tended sheep they acquired from the Spanish, while their relatives the Apaches alternately fought and traded with Spaniards, Mexicans, and Anglo-Americans alike. The most widely known of western Indians were the horseback riders who hunted the bison, or buffalo, across the Great Plains. The Plains people used dozens of plant and animal species but depended most conspicuously on the vast buffalo herds that dominated the environment. Pursuing the animals on horseback, they ate fresh or dried buffalo meat and used the hides for clothing and for their distinctive portable dwelling, the teepee. Their mounts had originally come by purchase, escape, or capture from early Spanish settlers and from --- Pueblo Indians, who seized large Spanish herds at the time of their 1680 revolt and traded them eastward to the southern Plains. There the Comanches brought horse culture to perfection, pushed the Apaches westward toward New Mexico by the mid-eighteenth century, and then used their superb horsemanship to create a raiding and trading network that dominated most of inland Texas and its surrounding territory. From the Rocky Mountains, Cheyennes and Arapahos also acquired horses from New Mexico and used them to move southward and join the hunting, raiding, and trading culture of the Plains. By contrast, the Lakotas (also called the Sioux) and smaller eastern groups did not acquire enough horses to leave the Great Lakes region and venture extensively across the Plains until the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The Mandans and similar tribes remained along the Missouri River in permanent villages composed of domed earthen structures, and combined mounted buffalo hunts with tilling corn and other crops. Horses allowed the Plains tribes to become formidable fighters who presented serious obstacles to white American expansion. At the same time, raiding for horses and competing for pasturage encouraged destructive wars among the tribes. Horses also competed seriously with buffalo for grass and water and enabled a huge market for buffalo hides, badly diminishing the wild herds long before the coming of the transcontinental railroad and professional white hunters. Even so, it would not be until after the Civil War, with the near extinction of the buffalo and a long series of disastrous wars and broken treaties, that the Plains Indians submitted to the far more numerous white Americans. ### FIRST COLONIES Previous European colonizers joined the Native Americans in the human variety of the West. Explorers entered from New Spain as early as 1540, when Francisco Vásquez de Coronado met the Pueblo Indians while Hernando de Soto was crisscrossing the Southeast. When these conquistadores found no precious metals, however, Spain lost interest and only kept a band of frontier outposts from Florida to California to convert the Indians and guard its more valuable colonies to the south. Except for New Mexico, moreover, Spain’s western buffers appeared late, when French, British, and Russian trading posts seemed to threaten its hold on the area, and remained small. These colonizing powers all depended on Indian trade or Indian labor, but the coer- --- cive methods of the Spanish and the Russians proved far too inflexible and unproductive for permanent success. The British and Anglo-Americans gained far more with voluntary trading, to which they added military conquest and the population pressure of agricultural settlements. This combination of methods finally brought most of the area to the United States. Spain’s first settlements in what became the US southwest began in 1598, when Don Juan de Oñate founded the colony of New Mexico in the upper valley of the Rio Grande. After crushing the Pueblo Revolt of 1680, Spain relaxed its harsh mission program to coexist with the Pueblos and cooperate with them in order to resist the Apaches. With 25,000 Hispanic residents in 1800, New Mexico became Spain’s largest outpost in the thinly populated north. Other Spanish settlements resembled New Mexico on a smaller scale. In the early eighteenth century, Hispanic settlers followed Jesuit missionaries into southern Arizona, but their numbers did not exceed a thousand. About the same time, the Spanish built a handful of forts and missions in Texas to counter the influence of French traders from Louisiana. Texas developed a ranching economy, but the province did not flourish, and there were still less than 2,000 Spanish-speaking *tejanos* in 1763, when the French surrendered Louisiana to Spain at the end of the Seven Years’ War, or French and Indian War. The last Spanish settlement emerged in California. Mostly ignoring Baja (Lower) California, Mexican officials began to eye Alta (Upper) California when they heard that Russians might enter it from Alaska. There the Spanish met as many as 300,000 Indians, a regional population thought to be more numerous than any other north of Mexico. The native Californians lived in hundreds of small bands, supporting themselves on rich harvests of acorns, other seeds, and a variety of game animals. Rarely warring among themselves, they proved no match for the heavily armed Spanish invaders. Converting them to Christianity became a major goal of Spanish colonization. Led by a military commander and the Franciscan missionary Fray Junipero Serra, a combined expedition of soldiers and friars reached San Diego in 1769 and built the first mission and fort, or *presidio*. Their settlement grew slowly, but the Franciscans eventually constructed 21 coastal settlements between San Diego and the north shore of San Francisco Bay. Cattle ranches later took shape on huge private land grants, but Alta California still grew slowly, with a Hispanic population that did not reach 1,000 until 1790. --- The California mission system mixed idealistic goals with brutal methods. Embracing lives of extreme poverty and self-denial, determined friars urged Indians to move into mission settlements with churches and farms. Indian residents, or “neophytes,” received food, clothing, shelter, and intense indoctrination in the Spaniards’ faith and culture. In return, they were bound to a lifetime of labor, with chains and beatings for those who tried to escape. They also had to speak, dress, and behave like Spaniards, including observance of Spanish gender roles and marital practices. Unmarried women faced special burdens, including nightly imprisonment to safeguard their chastity, and soldiers enforced the rules at every mission. Joining the missions could bring early death from diseases, but when Spanish horses, cattle, and hogs degraded their natural food supply, increasing numbers of Indians had to take the chance. By the time Mexican independence put an end to the mission era in 1821, the number of neophytes had reached 21,000, while the number of other Indians in the mission districts alone had fallen from 72,000 to 18,000. The total number of California Indians fell by half during Spanish and Mexican rule, from around 300,000 to around 150,000. Spain’s fears of a Russian threat to California proved groundless, for its Alaskan outpost lacked all resources for an invasion. The northernmost colony in Pacific America had grown up as a distant extension of Russia’s long conquest of Siberia. Pursuing sables and other furbearing animals across the vast cold forests of northern Asia, Russian merchants reached the Pacific in the early seventeenth century, during the early decades of English settlement in Virginia. Instead of the voluntary barter offered by the French and British, the Russians seized native hostages and demanded furs for their release. As the numbers of sables and Siberians inevitably dwindled, eighteenth-century Russians ventured into the north Pacific for fresh sources. Sailing for the czar, Danish Captain Vitus Bering and a Russian subordinate made separate landings on the Alaskan mainland in 1741, but Bering could not reach home before winter. Some of his crewmen survived their frigid layover in the Aleutian Islands, but not Bering. Their reward was an impressive cargo of sea otter pelts that sold in China for a bountiful profit. Pursuing Bering’s discoveries, the Russians took skins from the Aleutian Islands with their customary forceful methods for four decades without attempting a permanent settlement. In