1784, however, shortly after the United States won independence from Britain, 130 Russian settlers established an enduring outpost on Kodiak Island, --- just off the Alaskan mainland. Their presence grew slowly until 1812, when they finally reached northern California, established a trading post at Fort Ross, and remained there 30 years. Over the same period, Russian Orthodox missionaries mitigated the worst abuses of the fur trade and gained some local converts whose descendants maintain the faith today. Russian America remained Europe’s smallest and weakest colony on the Pacific. ## THE ARRIVAL OF ANGLO-AMERICANS Sustained American attention to the land beyond the Mississippi began in 1803, when President Jefferson purchased the vast province of Louisiana from France, and dispatched the Corps of Discovery led by Captain Lewis and Lieutenant Clark to cross it and trace a path to the Pacific coast. Their expedition returned in 1806 without discovering an easy waterway across the continent, but did bring back exciting tales of vast mountains, huge plains and rivers, radically diverse climates, strange peoples, teeming wildlife, and beckoning opportunities. Trappers were the first to follow in Lewis and Clark’s path. In 1808, New York businessman John Jacob Astor founded the American Fur Company with the intention of gaining control of the entire US fur trade. To compete with the British Hudson’s Bay Company, he began with a seaborne expedition around the southern tip of South America to establish Fort Astoria at the mouth of the Columbia River in 1811 and followed with an overland expedition to find a practical land route. On their way back to St. Louis in 1812, a party from this expedition discovered South Pass in the future state of Wyoming, which was the lowest and most accessible opening through the Rocky Mountains and the key to a wagon trail to the Pacific. Hoping to sell their quarry to Astor, trappers soon fanned across the upper reaches of Missouri in search of smaller streams where the beavers built their dams and lodges. The most knowledgeable became known as mountain men, renowned for their hunting skills and deep understanding of the peaks and forests. Often marrying Indian women, the mountain men hunted all winter and then converged by the thousand at a company-sponsored rendezvous in midsummer to sell their peltry, buy supplies, and raucously celebrate the end of a successful season. With mountain men as his advance guard, John Jacob Astor monopolized the American fur trade by 1830 but sold his stake in 1834 --- when the fashion for beaver hats began declining. Investing his gains in New York real estate, Astor became the wealthiest man in America, with a fortune of $20 million when he died in 1848. By the 1820s, a well-marked trail stretched from Independence, Missouri, up the Missouri River, and across the plains to Oregon by way of South Pass. In 1836, Dr. Marcus Whitman and his wife, Narcissa, followed this path to become missionaries to the Indians in modern Washington State. In the same year, the first wagon train took the Oregon Trail as far as Idaho, and Whitman himself led the first large wave of 1,000 emigrants from there to Oregon’s Willamette Valley in 1843. The settlers created a prosperous agricultural society with a growing population, but with no clear demarcation between British and American sovereignty, diplomatic pressure on both nations’ leaders to find a solution increased. Farther to the south, Mormon pioneers followed part of the Oregon Trail in 1846 and 1847 to the valley of the Great Salt Lake in modern Utah. There the church regrouped, established the society it had been seeking, and continued adding residents through foreign and domestic missionary efforts. Before the coming of the transcontinental railroad in 1869, as many as 400,000 emigrants had followed the Oregon Trail to the Pacific. Adding to the traffic, the California Trail branched from the main route in 1843, followed by the Mormon Trail to Utah in 1847 and the Bozeman Trail in 1863. The passage of these pioneers brought the development of western states, including California, Oregon, and Washington, but naturally increased conflict with intervening Indian tribes and opened the way for destruction of the buffalo herds. As Americans approached Oregon, the crumbling of the Spanish Empire also drew them to the Southwest, especially to the Mexican province of Texas, where 20,000 Comanche Indians had built up a vast commercial empire the Spanish called Comanchería. Ever since the eighteenth century, the Comanches had used mounted hit-and-run raids to dominate their neighbors and amass huge herds of horses, which they traded, along with buffalo skins and captives, all around their domains. As the unquestioned masters of central Texas, they had effectively halted most Spanish settlement north of the Rio Grande. After independence in 1821, the Mexican government began recruiting settlers to contest Comanche dominance. Moses Austin of St. Louis quickly won permission for a settlement of 300 families, and his son Stephen F. Austin led them to Texas when his father died soon afterward. Other *empresarios* won generous land grants and fol- --- lowed them. Most of the new settlers were slaveholding southerners, for the fertile plains of eastern Texas were ideal for cultivating cotton. Though independent Mexico had abolished slavery, it exempted Texas to gain more settlers, and the tactic worked. By 1835, some 30,000 Anglo-Americans and their 5,000 slaves dramatically outnumbered the territory’s 3,500 Hispanic *tejanos*. Like the Austins, some of the newcomers were reasonably conscientious immigrants who learned Spanish, promised to become at least nominal Catholics, and intended to support their new homeland. Others were footloose squatters with no strong loyalty anywhere and a sketchy commitment to law and order. Whatever their loyalties, most of the newcomers hugged the Gulf coast and refused to tangle with Comanchería. ### INDEPENDENT TEXAS By the end of the 1820s, Mexican authorities realized that American immigrants might take over Texas and reversed their earlier hospitality. New laws forbade the importation of more slaves and directed new immigrants away from the volatile borderland. When General Antonio López de Santa Anna seized power in 1835, he centralized all government decision making and revoked the autonomy of the Mexican states, including Coahuila y Tejas, which embraced modern Texas. Few *tejanos* welcomed these moves after experiencing long neglect by the central government in the face of repeated Comanche attacks. When Santa Anna went further and announced that he would enforce the laws against slavery, Hispanic and Anglo-American Texans exploded in resentment and proclaimed their independence in March 1836. Santa Anna immediately sought to crush this rebellion with an invasion that led to the capture and execution of insurgent forces at the town of Goliad and at the Alamo, a former Spanish mission in San Antonio. Soon after the fall of the Alamo, however, General Sam Houston ambushed Santa Anna’s army at the Battle of San Jacinto and captured the Mexican commander, forcing him to sign a treaty of independence that implied a Texas-Mexico border at the Rio Grande. Santa Anna repudiated this coerced agreement as soon as he got free, but victorious Texans quickly asked the US Congress for annexation. Texas’s new president, Sam Houston, was an old friend and protégé of US president Andrew Jackson. Old Hickory longed to gratify his friend and add the Lone Star Republic to the United States, but he knew that annexation would arouse charges of a plot to extend slavery --- and provoke Mexico to war. Not wanting to damage Van Buren’s prospects in the upcoming election of 1836, Jackson limited himself to recognizing Texas’s independence. For the next ten years, Mexico refused to accept the loss of its northern province and promised its eventual reconquest, but never carried out these threats. Instead, the Comanches avoided the Anglo-Americans and continued to weaken northern Mexico with unrelenting raids. Texas survived as an independent republic and the question of annexation lay dormant. ## War with Mexico Most white Americans had long gloried in western expansion. They celebrated when independence stretched the nation’s boundaries from the Appalachians to the Mississippi. They rejoiced again when Thomas Jefferson added the Louisiana Purchase to the “empire for liberty.” Democrats were most enthusiastic, and most critics were Federalists or Whigs, but support for expansion spread widely among the voters. More than mere wealth or power, each new acquisition seemed to promise the spread of republican principles, a new field for national identity, unity, and pride. The prospect of Texas annexation was no exception. ### TEXAS ANNEXATION The issue of Texas annexation revived when Virginian Abel P. Upshur replaced US Secretary of State Daniel Webster in 1843. The new secretary was an ultra-conservative supporter of slavery and states’ rights who shared the president’s hunger for Texas. Tyler’s alienation from each of the major parties made both Whigs and Democrats unwilling to hand him a victory, however, and Upshur made no progress until rumors of British plots began to circulate. Britain had abolished slavery in its own colonies in 1834 and favored the end of slavery everywhere. If Texas masters were willing to give up their relatively few slaves, diplomats whispered, England might advance the funds to compensate them and persuade Mexico to recognize their independence. As a British quasi-protectorate, Texas would then be flooded with British immigrants and capital, fully making up for any losses occasioned by the sacrifice of slavery. Having just fought a revolution to defend their slaves from Mexico, it is doubtful that white Texans would so easily surrender them to Brit- --- ain, but Houston and his diplomats used the rumors to great effect in Washington. Officials began to wonder aloud what would happen to the American Southwest if Texas were "abolitionized." Runaways from the Black Belt would gain a haven, they predicted. Slaveholders could never take the plantation system beyond Louisiana. White yeomen would flock to the new free labor paradise, leaving planters and slaves behind them in an ever-blacker, ever more dangerous South. British adventurers would mingle with the Indians and runaway blacks as they had in Spanish Florida, inciting forays into the slave states and possibly creating a beachhead for a serious British invasion. These thoughts greatly alarmed Secretary Upshur as he reached out to other proslavery leaders to rally support for a treaty of annexation. The proslavery meaning of annexation grew even stronger in early 1844, when Upshur suddenly died and President Tyler appointed John C. Calhoun to take his place. Calhoun blasted the British with proslavery arguments and condemned their alleged abolitionist plots, effectively polarizing the issue for northern and southern Americans. Having alienated both parties, John Tyler had almost no chance of election to the presidency in his own right in 1844. The presumed candidates of the two major parties were Democrat Martin Van Buren and Whig Henry Clay. Sensing the divisive potential of the Texas question, they each moved to neutralize it by agreeing to postpone annexation in order to prevent a war with Mexico. Unfortunately for these plans, however, Calhoun had done his work so well that it was nearly impossible to placate anti-Texas northerners without offending pro-Texas southerners, especially among Democrats. Andrew Jackson himself repudiated Van Buren's anti-Texas waffle, and southerners abandoned him at the Democratic convention. The New Yorker could not gain the nomination without southern support, so after eight fruitless ballots, the convention turned to former governor James K. Polk of Tennessee, an annexation stalwart whom Van Buren had considered as a possible running mate. The election of 1844 thus emerged as an excited referendum on territorial expansion. The little-known Polk called for the "reannexation of Texas and the reoccupation of Oregon," on the dubious theory that Texas had actually been part of the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 but exchanged for Florida in 1819. The theory was useful because it enabled Polk to ease away from Calhoun's position and cast the Texas question as matter of trans-sectional nationalism rather than a morally tainted land grab for slavery. As for Oregon, that country extended from north- --- ern California to the southern boundary of Russian Alaska at latitude 54°40' north. The United States and Britain had earlier agreed to leave it open to traders of both nations, but Polk claimed that the Lewis and Clark expedition had given the United States a “clear and unquestionable” title to the whole region. The area would obviously be free territory if it ever joined the American Union, so northern Democrats salved their discomfort over Texas with the belligerent chant “fifty-four forty or fight!” Henry Clay resisted the frenzy for expansion. The Whig candidate looked for unity by promising northerners not to wage war for what some were beginning to call the “Slave Power,” and assuring southerners that Texas would be theirs eventually, but his tactic only seemed evasive. A small number of antislavery Whigs cast votes for James G. Birney of the Liberty Party, probably costing Clay the electoral votes of New York and Michigan, and thus the election itself. Polk swept most of the South and West, and took New York and Pennsylvania, for 170 electoral votes to Clay’s 105. The popular vote divided more closely, with Polk gaining 49.6 percent, Clay 48.1 percent, and Birney taking the rest. The mandate for “Polk and Texas” was narrow but clear, and the president-elect prepared to make the most of it. In fact, John Tyler beat him to the punch. The lame-duck president had submitted an annexation treaty, but Senate Whigs denied him the votes he needed to ratify it. Taking another tack, Tyler declared that a simple congressional majority could “add states” with a joint resolution, though treaties with foreign nations (like Texas) required ratification by two-thirds of the Senate. Congress accordingly authorized Tyler to acquire Texas by treaty or joint resolution, whichever he preferred. Unsurprisingly, Tyler chose the resolution method and offered statehood to Texas in his last days as president. Polk soon endorsed the plan, and Texas accepted it on July 4, 1845. Manifest Destiny and the Slave Power had won a major victory, but its costs would be far greater than anyone imagined in 1845. ### POLK TAKES CHARGE Besides the conflict over Texas, President Polk had four major objectives for his administration. He wanted to settle the Oregon boundary dispute with Britain and to reduce the tariff to a level that gave the government just enough revenue to operate but no more. As an orthodox Jacksonian, he also wanted to reestablish the Independent --- Treasury that Martin Van Buren had obtained but a Whig Congress had later abolished. Most ambitiously, Polk desired one more acquisition from Mexico: the fabled land of California. Like Texas a decade or two earlier, California was a thinly populated Mexican province, but Polk knew it was a potentially fertile country with a good harbor at San Francisco to protect America’s Pacific trade and other interests. A strong believer in Manifest Destiny, Polk had no doubt that US citizens would soon flood the area as they had already done in Texas and were beginning to do in Oregon, and he was confident that the Mexican government would have to give way somehow. In his single term in office, President Polk accomplished all four of these major objectives and more besides, which gave this secretive, almost furtive Tennessean more success in gaining his own objectives than most presidents in US history. Polk focused on foreign affairs, leaving his tariff and Treasury goals to congressional lieutenants who eventually achieved them. He took up Oregon first, for the Democrats had campaigned on the demand for “all Oregon,” and the pugnacious chant “fifty-four forty or fight” was getting cheers at barrooms and militia musters all over the country. Even so, Polk did not want to fight Great Britain, the world’s most powerful nation, for a marginally valuable territory. He was willing to divide Oregon by stretching the existing boundary on the 49th parallel to the Pacific, but British trappers and settlers occupied the land between there and the Columbia River and did not want to give it up. Ultimately unwilling to fight for such a distant and seemingly insignificant spot, Britain eventually backed down and agreed to extend the existing boundary to Puget Sound while retaining Vancouver Island. ## FIGHTING MEXICO The boundary with Mexico might also have been compromised but Polk and his Mexican counterparts would not back down. The traditional southern boundary of Mexican Texas had been the Rio Nueces, but the Republic of Texas wanted a more southern boundary on the Rio Grande del Norte. The difference seemed trivial where the two streams met the Gulf of Mexico, only 100 miles apart, but the Rio Grande was far longer than the Nueces and looped almost 2,000 miles to the north and west. A boundary there would give the United States far more land than the Texans had actually settled, but Polk was determined to have it. Compared to the United States, Mexico was poor --- and weak but also proud and very sensitive. Its unstable government could not recapture Texas, but any leader who surrendered it would be overthrown, so it might be preferable to fight a losing war against the United States than admit defeat in advance. To appear flexible, Polk sent John Slidell as minister to Mexico with an offer that was actually an ultimatum: $25 million and assumption of Mexico’s debts to Americans in exchange for a Rio Grande border, plus the provinces of New Mexico and Alta California (i.e., the modern US state of California). He also ordered General Zachary Taylor and 4,000 American troops to seize the disputed territory and occupy the north bank of the Rio Grande. With national honor at stake, Mexican officials would not back down and refused to meet with Slidell. He accordingly withdrew, and the Mexican army marched northward to expel what it regarded as a hostile invasion. In the spring of 1846, Taylor built a small fort on the north bank of the Rio Grande and trained his guns on the village of Matamoros on the opposite shore. Responding to this unmistakable dare, a Mexican force crossed the river and surprised an American patrol on April 25, 1846, killing or wounding 15 Americans and capturing most of the rest. Taylor counterattacked and pushed the Mexicans back across the river. Slidell’s failure had already persuaded Polk to ask Congress for a declaration of war, but the news of actual fighting strengthened his hand. When Taylor’s dispatches reached Washington in early May, the president informed Congress that war already existed because “Mexico . . . has invaded our territory and shed American blood on American soil.” Democrats in Congress shared the president’s enthusiasm and quickly proposed a bill to authorize 50,000 volunteer soldiers and $10 million to pay for them. Whigs were willing to support American troops, but they had always been less eager for geographical expansion than their opponents, and they felt that Polk had picked a fight by seizing Mexican territory. They bitterly protested when Democrats fastened a preamble to the appropriation bill declaring that “by the act of the Republic of Mexico, a state of war exists between that government and the United States.” With a firm majority, unrelenting Democrats forced Whigs to vote for the preamble or go on record as opposing the rescue of embattled American troops. In the end, most Whigs surrendered to political logic. The war bill passed the House by 174 votes to 14 on May 11 and the Senate by 40 to 2 on the following day, though furious Whigs still fumed that Polk’s orders to Taylor had provoked an “illegal, unrighteous, and damnable war.” --- The Mexican War proved widely popular with Democrats and southerners, but far less so among northern Whigs. The army received far more volunteers than it could take, and eventually enlisted 112,000 troops. Two-thirds came from the South, but others condemned the war as proslavery aggression. Abraham Lincoln, then a freshman Whig congressman from Illinois, tried to shame the administration with his Spot Resolution, which demanded the exact spot of the initial skirmish, hoping to show it was not American soil as Polk had claimed. Going further, Henry David Thoreau served a night in jail instead of drilling with his town militia, and defended the protest in what has become a classic essay, “Civil Disobedience.” Other Whigs joined in the fighting to win their share of glory while still deploring its origins. Unperturbed, Polk launched a strategy to occupy as much of Mexico as possible, and ordered attacks at the mouth of the Rio Grande (where the war had started), in New Mexico, and in California. General Taylor won quick success at the first target. Demoralized by years of Indian attacks, the local population put up little resistance when Taylor crossed the Rio Grande, the Mexican Army retreated, and Americans captured the city of Monterey in September 1846, after a five-day siege marked by furious hand-to-hand fighting. The other two incursions were even more successful. Long accustomed to more trade and closer contact with Comanchería and St. Louis than Mexico City, the residents of Santa Fe welcomed their invaders with oaths of allegiance to the United States. In California, a group of mostly American insurgents took advantage of worsening US-Mexican relations to overthrow the province’s weak administration in 1846, raise a flag featuring a California grizzly, and proclaim their own “Bear Flag Republic.” An American exploring party led by Captain John C. Frémont soon reinforced them and crushed Mexican resistance, while US naval forces replaced the Bear Flag with the Stars and Stripes. The United States had secured the Pacific coast by the end of 1846. Mexico would not capitulate despite these