9, 1788). In Pennsylvania, a pro-federalist faction had perfected a political machine that hastened through the ratification process before the opposition had time to organize. Virginia and New York presented serious obstacles, however, for the new union could never function effectively without them both, and their conventions generated a long and serious debate about the Constitution’s merits. --- # THE FEDERALIST PAPERS New York City and the lower Hudson Valley were highly commercialized areas, but upstate counties were much less enthusiastic about a stronger union, and Governor George Clinton was a committed localist whose opposition had killed the second proposal for a congressional impost in 1783. In an effort to swing public opinion, Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, and James Madison joined forces to produce a series of 85 newspaper essays in favor of ratification, using the signature "Publius." Republished in book form, the essays became known as *The Federalist Papers*, and they are still recognized as the most eloquent and authoritative exposition of the US Constitution ever written. The authors discussed the Constitution’s implications both large and small, but the most far-reaching arguments came in Madison’s discussions of the new government’s benefits, particularly in Federalist No. 10. Struggling with eighteenth-century political concepts to explore a new set of problems, Madison used these essays to explain how the US Constitution could restrain the unpropertied majority without creating a tyranny of the few. Theorists had long assumed that republican government could only function in small homogeneous states. A large republic would either succumb to despotism, because it was more efficient, or be torn apart by faction, because its people were too diverse to agree. In Federalist No. 10, Madison pointed out that small size had not protected Rhode Island from factionalism, and suggested that a large republic might be safer than a small one. He began by defining “faction” in classic fashion, as a political group motivated by its own self-interest or passion instead of the common good. Significantly, a faction for Madison could even compose a majority of the electorate, so long as it was motivated by self-interest instead of virtue. His task was to show how a large, federated republic could prevent domination by a selfish majority. Madison admitted that people could never abandon self-interest entirely, so the Constitution could never prevent the formation of factions, but only control their effects. In a large continental republic like America, he predicted, people would not divide neatly between the rich and the poor, or the few and the many, for social and economic diversity would ensure that no single interest could ever predominate. Representatives would come from relatively large districts where supporters of petty causes would suffer in comparison to the broad- --- minded, well-traveled, well-connected, and cosmopolitan "fit characters" that Madison pinned his hopes on. Sent to join similar gentlemen at a distant congress, these men would be more qualified to recognize the general good and carry it out than narrow-minded demagogues. And if some representatives lacked virtue themselves, Congress would never approve their selfish projects because their factions would be too small to command the majority. Clearly recalling the Rhode Island experiment in paper money and the eruption of the Massachusetts Regulators, Madison predicted that the operation of the Constitution would frustrate any nationwide movement for the "improper or wicked project[s]" so popular in the states, including "a rage for paper money, for an abolition of debts, [or] for an equal division of property." "In the extent and proper structure of the Union," Federalist No. 10 concluded proudly, "we behold a Republican remedy for the diseases most incident to Republican Government." Antifederalists understood Madison’s logic but feared its consequences. Still thinking of a society divided between the many and the few, they insisted that the Constitution was the product of a selfish minority. Like Madison, they realized that a national elite would dominate all three branches of the government, but feared they could never join it. "Unhappily for us," charged a North Carolina antifederalist, the federal officeholders "will have too much weight for us; they will have friends in the government who will be inclined against us, and thus we may be oppressed with impunity." Others worried that traders would benefit more than subsistence farmers. As one federalist groaned, "The common people have unhappily taken up the idea that the system is formed for commerce and not for them." Like the British ministry, which could not imagine how colonies and Parliament could divide sovereignty between them, antifederalists also found it hard to understand how two sets of authority could coexist in the same realm. Either the states or the federal government must be supreme, they reasoned, and the new Constitution would give all the advantages to the latter. Drawing on classical republican theory, they reasoned that the democratic branch of government must "represent" the people to their "sovereigns," and even the US House of Representatives was too distant and immobile for such purposes. Here the federalists neatly turned the tables. Building on the constitutional experience of states like Massachusetts, they argued that neither the state nor federal governments were sovereign in them- --- selves, but both were creatures of the sovereign people. The people could delegate some powers to the states, some to the federal government, and retain others for themselves, making every government and every officer their “representative,” state as well as federal. In this sense, the federal government would be just as republican as the states and equally protective of public liberty. By insisting that the US Constitution was as much a product of “we the people” as the smallest unit of local government, federalists deflected the argument that the new government was somehow antirepublican, while they helped legitimize an institution that was actually intended to resist popular influence. As an intellectual achievement, the Constitution was therefore both democratic and conservative at the same time. ### A BILL OF RIGHTS In the end, the outcome probably had more to do with political organizing than intellectual arguments, but the ideas discussed in *The Federalist Papers* and similar works did have a powerful impact on the ways Americans thought about their government. As the campaign proceeded, antifederalist opposition began to center on the absence of a bill of rights like the parliamentary statute that had limited royal power after the Glorious Revolution of 1688–1689 and similar features in the state constitutions. George Mason, who wrote Virginia’s Declaration of Rights but left the federal convention disenchanted, led the campaign for a bill of rights. Federalists called this addition unnecessary, insisting that the federal government could never take actions that the Constitution did not authorize, including interference in matters like speech or religion. They worried instead that a list of explicitly protected freedoms would imply that unlisted rights were not protected. To win over doubtful delegates, Madison finally relented and promised to support a bill of rights after ratification, based on state suggestions for amendments. Reassured by this pledge, eleven states ratified the Constitution by the end of July 1788. The next challenge would be to implement the new document, and to test its meaning. * Scholars have often asked if the Revolution changed American society as much as it influenced its government. The Revolution did not overthrow the nation’s social foundations, but its consequences for ordi --- nary men and women were still profound. The abolition of northern slavery enabled free African Americans to strengthen their own communities and to lay the groundwork for a longer struggle against slavery in the South. Women still lacked political rights, but the rhetoric of liberty and virtue strengthened their demands for more education and expanded roles in their families and in public. For American Indians, the war destroyed old protective arrangements and forced new efforts to unify the tribes and protect Indian lands. The Revolution made its greatest social changes among white men. The colonial gentry had not intended the rhetoric of liberty to empower their social inferiors, but the momentum of equality moved steadily in that direction. The electorate expanded and, as the clash between William Thompson and John Rutledge demonstrated, ordinary voters grew much less submissive to upper-class dominance. Many white men from the middling and lower classes increased their economic and political standing and won public offices they could never have gained before. In the state legislatures, they responded to economic crisis with measures that benefited their own constituents, but that in the view of cosmopolitan leaders, violated the rights of property and made national problems worse. The movement to create a stronger central government arose in this turbulent social and political climate. Federalist leaders hoped that a powerful national legislature, controlled by wealthy, educated, and well-connected men like themselves, would rein in the states and balance liberty with their own version of order. Antifederalists hotly replied that the US Constitution would reverse equality and impose a cosmopolitan tyranny. James Madison replied that the United States would be too large and complex for any one group to dominate. Was he right? Could the American republic adopt a strong central government without crushing democratic localism? Put another way, could men like William Thompson live freely under a government designed by men like John Rutledge? On both sides, many Americans believed that the answer depended on how the new administration of George Washington would implement the new constitution. --- # CHAPTER 7 # Federalists and Republicans, 1789–1815 John Adams and Thomas Jefferson were once great friends. They met in 1775, when both pushed reluctant members of the Second Continental Congress to support American independence. They worked together to prepare the Declaration of Independence, but Adams asked Jefferson to write its first draft because of his “happy talent for composition.” Leading the new republic drew Adams and Jefferson even closer. When the Confederation Congress sent them both to Europe as America’s first diplomats, Adams called Jefferson “an old Friend . . . in whose Abilities and Steadiness I always found great Cause to confide.” It was especially ironic in hindsight that he praised Jefferson’s freedom from “Party Passions.” And Jefferson felt just as warmly about Adams. “He is profound in his views, and accurate in his judgment,” he told James Madison. Admitting to Adams’s personal quirks, Jefferson still assured his fellow Virginian that Adams “is so amiable . . . that you will love him.” Foreign service kept Adams and Jefferson from attending the Philadelphia convention of 1787, and both had their criticisms of the Constitution it produced, but they both favored ratification. When George Washington took office as the nation’s first president, they served his administration together—Adams as vice president and Jefferson as secretary of state. By 1800, everything had changed. Adams was president by then and Jefferson was vice president, but Jefferson was seeking the nation’s highest office himself to deny his old friend a second term. George Washington was dead and the national unity he symbolized seemed gone as well, shattered by bitter partisan warfare between Adams’s Federalists and Jefferson’s Democratic-Republicans. (The supporters --- FIGURE 5. In 1798, hostility between congressional Federalists and Democratic-Republicans brought violence to the floor of Congress. American cartoon print filing series, Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, LC-DIG-ppmsca-31832. of ratification and the members of President Adams’s political party shared a name but were not always the same people, so it is convenient to call the former “federalists” and the latter “Federalists.”) As the party in power, Federalists were jailing their most vocal opponents, while undaunted party presses hurled invective back and forth. Democratic-Republicans described Federalist economic policies as “rapine, fraud, and plunder” carried on by “a system of speculation, fraud, and bankruptcy,” while Federalists urged every voter to ask himself a simple question: “Shall I continue in allegiance to GOD — AND A RELIGIOUS PRESIDENT; Or impiously declare for JEFFERSON — AND NO GOD!!!” One newspaper concluded that “there is scarcely a possibility we shall escape a civil war.” Thomas Jefferson defeated Adams. A procedural quirk in the Electoral College left the election unresolved, however, so as the Consti- --- tution directs, the House of Representatives made the final decision, going through 36 fruitless ballots before finally deciding for Jefferson. John Adams was so embittered by defeat that he refused to attend his rival’s swearing-in. On Inauguration Day, March 4, 1801, he boarded a public stagecoach at four o’clock in the morning and turned his back on the infant city of Washington, DC. Eleven years would pass before Adams and Jefferson could begin to repair their old friendship. For the rest of his life, Thomas Jefferson referred to his victory as “the Revolution of 1800” and believed that the United States had narrowly escaped a return to monarchy. For all its explosive animosity, the election did see the nation’s first free transfer of power from one party to another, and Jefferson stressed reconciliation as his term began. Yet the framers of the Constitution had not anticipated that popular votes or political parties would choose the president. The election’s divisiveness was at least as remarkable as its peaceful resolution. The election of 1800 might not have surprised observers of the state conventions that ratified the Constitution in 1787 and 1788. As they debated the new frame of government, federalists had denounced a spirit of anarchy and radical democracy apparently unleashed by the Revolution. Antifederalists shot back that the proposed Constitution would strangle the liberty of common citizens. Following ratification, probably no one but the deeply respected George Washington could have persuaded winners and losers to come together. Washington’s appeal to national unity did not endure. Rival visions of the future divided his administration and put Jefferson and Adams on opposite sides. Hostility spread from the administration to Congress and from there to the state legislatures and the voters themselves. Disputes over foreign policy made domestic divisions even worse, until Federalists and their newly organized rivals the Democratic-Republicans (often simply called Republicans) were at each other’s throats. Despite some overheated predictions, however, civil war did not break out in 1800. While some of Jefferson’s supporters had once been antifederalists, they had accepted the Constitution’s framework, and determined not to overthrow their opponents but to outvote them. Electoral rivalry allowed a mostly peaceful expression of deep-seated differences. Organized opposition checked the Federalists’ most undemocratic impulses and ensured that the new government would not become the aristocratic tyranny that the antifederalists had feared. Instead of undermining the Constitution, Federalists and Re- --- publicans both praised it as a sacred charter, and each claimed to be its true champions. When the United States survived a second war with Great Britain between 1812 and 1815, constitutional government emerged much stronger than anyone could have predicted when George Washington took office. # Launching the Federal Republic The air was heavy with anxiety on April 30, 1789, when George Washington stood on the balcony of Federal Hall in New York City to take his oath of office. The new president questioned his own abilities for the immense task ahead and reminded his fellow citizens that preserving “the sacred fire of liberty” now depended on “the experiment intrusted to the hands of the American people.” Many in his audience undoubtedly shared his worries, but Washington inspired their confidence as he began to flesh out the Constitution’s prescriptions. ### CREATING PRECEDENTS The new government began to form in 1788, as soon as nine states had ratified the Constitution. State legislatures chose their new senators and arranged for elections to the House of Representatives. Most also chose their presidential electors, but Pennsylvania and Maryland left this decision to the voters. George Washington was the electors’ unanimous choice for president, and John Adams became vice president. Congress followed the Confederation government by creating three departments for federal business. The Treasury was the largest, befitting the role of finances in the government’s creation, and Washington asked his trusted aide Alexander Hamilton to lead it. Thomas Jefferson, minister to France, became secretary of state, and General Henry Knox of Massachusetts continued in his previous post as secretary of war. Washington sought regular advice from these officials, but they were not called the Cabinet until they started meeting as a group. An attorney general and a postmaster general completed the list of major appointments. To establish respect for his office, Washington partly modeled his conduct on a king’s. His journey to the inauguration resembled a royal procession, with endless ceremonies, speeches, toasts, banners, flowers, and anthems, and he later repeated the ritual in regional tours. He required visitors to come to him, did not return their calls, --- and held regular receptions, or levees, in royal style. An elegant coach with six matched horses and liveried attendants carried him through the streets. Not to be outdone, Congress spent its first month debating how the president should be addressed, with John Adams favoring “His Highness the President of the United States of America, and Defender of their Liberties.” Despite his adoption of some royal trappings, Washington was relieved stern simplicity prevailed and Congress settled for “Mr. President.” The addition of a bill of rights to the Constitution remained as unfinished business from the ratification process. From his seat in the House of Representatives, James Madison carefully sifted the modifications that the state conventions had requested. Discarding all that curbed essential powers like taxation, he composed twelve amendments that mostly limited the federal government’s power over individuals. Ten won state approval and became known as the Bill of Rights. The best-known features of the Bill of Rights guaranteed freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, the right to bear arms in state militias, trial by jury, and barriers against self-incrimination. In addition, the Tenth Amendment declared that “the powers not delegated to the United States by the constitution, nor prohibited to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people.” This provision became and remained controversial, as Americans disputed how completely it limited the actions of the federal government. The Bill of Rights soothed the suspicions of North Carolina and Rhode Island, and they ratified the Constitution in 1789 and 1790 respectively. The federal Bill of Rights did not restrict state governments at first. States freely violated the spirit of the First Amendment, silencing critics of slavery in the South, for example, and supporting established churches in New England. Federal courts did not apply the Bill of Rights to the states until the end of the nineteenth century. The First Congress also established a system of federal courts, since the Constitution had only sketched the outlines of the judicial branch. The Judiciary Act of 1789 established thirteen district courts, two circuit courts above them, and a six-member Supreme Court. State courts were supposed to handle most federal cases, and each state retained its own body of law and legal traditions. The Judiciary Act did allow parties in state courts to appeal their cases to federal courts if they claimed that a federally protected right was at stake. This provision became crucially important, for it allowed the Supreme Court to --- rule on the constitutionality of state laws, eventually making the judiciary an immensely powerful branch of the federal government. ## HAMILTON'S PLANS The need for money had been an important reason for adopting the Constitution, and it remained a central problem. Congress quickly passed the 5 percent impost on imports that reformers had vainly sought from the Confederation. Together with some higher duties on specific products like distilled spirits and a tax on incoming ships based on their size, or tonnage, the impost finally gave the government some reliable revenue, payable in coined money, or specie. Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton was responsible for the public debt. Unlike most of the founders, Hamilton was an outsider in American society who had been born out of wedlock in the West Indies. Charitable merchants discovered his talents as a clerk when he was in his teens and arranged for his education at King’s College in New York, now Columbia University. During the Revolution, Hamilton left college for the army and distinguished himself as a field commander and staff officer for General Washington, and that record allowed him to marry into one of New York’s leading business and political families and become a prominent attorney. Hamilton was one America’s strongest supporters of a privileged elite and a centralized state, who praised the British Crown and nobility and frankly doubted the effectiveness of republican government. He always thought the Constitution was too weak, calling it “a frail and worthless fabric” in 1802, but he fought for its ratification by coauthoring *The Federalist Papers* with James Madison and John Jay. To the best of his considerable ability, Alexander Hamilton worked all his life to raise America as a great urban and commercial empire, rivaling the strength and wealth of Europe’s foremost kingdoms. Hamilton used a series of reports to Congress to outline his plans for the nation’s finances and economy. In January 1790, his “Report on the Public Credit” revived Robert Morris’s earlier call for a funded public debt, guaranteed by the impost and new taxes on coffee, tea, and imported alcohol. He also wanted the federal government to assume, or promise to pay, the remaining war debts of all the states. The national debt already stood at $54 million and state obligations would add another $25 million, but Hamilton argued that they all had paid for independence so the whole nation should repay them. --- Complicating these proposals, most state and federal IOUs no longer belonged to those who had first offered credit. Some of the original lenders were common soldiers who were paid with certificates instead of cash. Others were domestic or foreign investors who got bonds in exchange for large loans. Over time, many former soldiers had to sell their certificates for ready money, often for a small fraction of their face value. The purchasers would gain enormous windfalls at public expense if the debts were repaid at par, or face value, so many believed that speculators should get less than original lenders when the debts were repaid. Hamilton rejected this argument, insisting that the government must establish its credit by repaying all creditors at par. Hamilton’s larger vision reached further than his individual proposals. He believed that generous repayment would bring the government indispensable support from the bondholders, who included foreigners and some of the wealthiest and most powerful Americans. A fully funded debt would make federal bonds as valuable as money itself, moreover, so bonds could become collateral for new loans to support business expansion. Commercial farmers would benefit as cities grew and swelled demand for their