sweat of his brow, or by manual labor . . . is treated as if he was a loathsome beast, and shunned with the utmost disdain.” Vehemently racist in his view of blacks, Helper still proclaimed that immediate abolition of slavery was the only way to avoid a violent racial cataclysm. When Republicans reprinted his volume as campaign literature in 1859, southern leaders denounced Helper furiously and threatened him with death if he ever returned to his homeland. Tempers ran so high in Congress that southerners blocked the election to the speakership of any Republican who had endorsed *The Impending Crisis*, and the House went unorganized for two months in 1859 as the parties deadlocked and representatives brought weapons to the floor of Congress once again. ### THE LINCOLN-DOUGLAS DEBATES One of the most dramatic illustrations of the centrality of the slavery question appeared in 1858, when Stephen A. Douglas sought reelection to his US Senate seat from Illinois. State legislatures chose US senators before 1913, so Douglas did not face the electorate directly. As a test of party strength, however, Illinois Democrats gave Douglas a formal nomination and Republicans selected Abraham Lincoln to oppose him. Each candidate campaigned for legislators of his own party, urging voters to vote for legislative candidates who shared their preferences for US senator. The tall, lanky challenger was a living testimonial to the promise of free labor. Born to poverty in Kentucky, Lincoln had moved with his family to Indiana and then to Illinois. With the barest rudiments of education, he supported himself by common labor and fiercely drove himself upward, splitting rails first, then keeping store, and finally reading law. Attracted to Whig respect for self-improvement, Lincoln served several terms in the Illinois legislature and one term in Congress, where he attacked the illegality and injustice of the Mexican War. After leaving Congress, Lincoln returned to his law practice until the 1854 passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act moved him to speak and organize for the Republican Party in Illinois. He was winning recognition as an orator when Republicans chose him to oppose the Little --- Giant, but there were still few obvious signs of his potential for national greatness. To reach the voters, Lincoln and Douglas agreed to a series of seven outdoor, face-to-face debates across rural Illinois. Oratorical contests like these were popular campaign devices, for isolated citizens hungered for entertaining spectacles, and thousands of listeners were willing to gather for lively exchanges that continued for hours in the summer sun. Political rallies could also feature musical interludes, crude humor, and free food and drink, but the center of the Lincoln-Douglas debates was the future of slavery and its effects on the liberty of white Illinoisans. Each candidate struggled to make the most convincing case possible for his party’s position and succeeded in spelling out stark alternatives for the nation’s racial future. One of Lincoln’s most famous thrusts occurred at the town of Freeport, when he asked Douglas how western settlers could keep a territory free soil without violating the *Dred Scott* decision. Repeating a popular Democratic position, Douglas replied that territories could keep out slaveholders by refusing to pass any laws to protect human property, such as banning aid to runaways or creating nightly patrols. Becoming known as the Freeport Doctrine, this position hurt Douglas among southerners, who concluded that his alleged tolerance for slavery was insincere. More fundamentally, the debates turned on the issue of slavery and race, and whether the oppression of black Americans was detrimental to whites, as Lincoln argued, or essential to their well-being, as Douglas claimed. Douglas challenged Lincoln’s notion that the United States could not continue “half slave and half free,” for the country had flourished that way since its founding. The idea proved that Lincoln was an abolitionist, Douglas charged, and the success of his doctrines would either split the nation or free the South’s slaves to roam through Illinois, voting and claiming equality with its whites. “I would not blot out the great inalienable rights of white men for all the negroes that ever existed,” Douglas boasted. “Those of you who believe that the negro is your equal . . . of course will vote for Mr. Lincoln.” Douglas’s race-baiting put Lincoln in a bind. The Republican candidate did abhor slavery, he was determined to check the political power of slaveholders, and he thought that racist demagoguery was a smoke screen to preserve the privileges of the Slave Power. Nevertheless, Lincoln did not yet believe in racial equality, and he knew the Illinois electorate did not either. Backed into a corner, Lincoln acknowledged his --- conviction that “there is a physical difference between the races which I believe will forever forbid the two races living together on terms of social and political equality.” Contrary to Douglas and Chief Justice Taney, however, Lincoln insisted that black Americans did have precious rights. “In the right to eat the bread, without leave of anybody else, which his own hand earns, *he is my equal, and the equal of Judge Douglas, and the equal of every living man.*” Those who thought otherwise were enemies of liberty and defenders of aristocracy, Lincoln proclaimed, and therefore faithless to American principles of republican government. Agreeing that Lincoln spoke for their own aspirations against southern pronouncements that white and black workers were all “the very mud-sill of society,” audiences supported him with banners proclaiming themselves **SMALL-FISTED FARMERS, MUDSILLS OF SOCIETY, GREASY MECHANICS FOR A. LINCOLN.** The Lincoln-Douglas debates spellbound Illinois audiences. Widely reprinted in popular newspapers, they also attracted national attention. Without embracing racial equality or the most radical convictions of the abolitionists, Lincoln forced his listeners to consider that the endless oppression of African Americans was not only a betrayal of their dearest principles but an active injury to white society and republican government. In reply, Douglas insisted that a good society for white Americans could not exist without keeping blacks in slavery. In the end, the debates did not change the political complexion of Illinois. Republican legislative candidates received more votes, but Democrats still kept the legislature and returned Douglas to the Senate. The national consequences were significant, however, for Douglas’s support for the Freeport Doctrine showed southerners the limits of his tolerance for slavery and badly damaged his presidential prospects. Lincoln gained national stature for the first time, moreover, and won the attention of Republican kingmakers who were already thinking hard about the presidential election of 1860. ### JOHN BROWN’S RAID Unknown to the readers of Helper’s *Impending Crisis*, an effort to provoke revolutionary violence was indeed at hand. John Brown had spent the years after Pottawatomie raising funds for the free-state forces in Kansas, but then decided on more. By 1858, a handful of black and white abolitionists had joined him in a secret plan to seize the federal arsenal at Harper’s Ferry, Virginia (now West Virginia). Once pos- --- sessed of arms and ammunition, Brown and his followers would rally slaves from the surrounding countryside in revolt. They would rid the land of slavery or die trying. Brown found distinguished supporters, including prominent abolitionist Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Unitarian minister and Transcendentalist Theodore Parker, and advocate for the blind and deaf Dr. Samuel Gridley Howe. With their cooperation, Brown diverted money from the cause of Kansas to the purchase of guns and simple iron pikes to arm the slaves he expected to follow him. He tried to enlist Frederick Douglass, America’s leading black abolitionist, but Douglass would have nothing to do with the scheme. “You will never get out alive,” he warned, but Brown had moved beyond such reservations, and his plan went forward. On the night of October 16, 1859, John Brown and 18 black and white comrades slipped across the Potomac River from Maryland and seized the federal weapons factory at Harper’s Ferry. No local slaves would dare join, but white militias soon converged on the village, killing 8 of Brown’s party and forcing the others to retreat to the armory’s tiny brick firehouse. That evening, Colonel Robert E. Lee and Lieutenant J. E. B. Stuart arrived with a company of US Marines and captured the last survivors. John Brown’s raid was over in a day and a half. The Commonwealth of Virginia quickly tried Brown for treason and condemned him to death. White southerners initially reacted to the attack with a touch of panic, but relaxed a bit when they realized that Brown’s plot had never come close to success. They recoiled in horror, however, when northerners treated him as a martyr instead of a madman. At his trial, the condemned man contrasted the simplest teachings of Christianity to “the blood of millions in this slave country” and moved northern readers to veneration. Bells, prayers, memorials, and funeral bunting marked the hour of his death, while Ralph Waldo Emerson affirmed that Brown would “make the gallows as glorious as the cross.” Leading Republicans like Abraham Lincoln and William H. Seward condemned the resort to violence, but the South forgot their disavowals when investigators traced Brown’s funds to prominent New Englanders. Just as “Bleeding Kansas” and the caning of Charles Sumner convinced many northerners that slavery destroyed republican values like tolerance for dissent and respect for majority rule, so the response to John Brown convinced many white southerners that their lives were not safe with Republicans in power. --- # THE ELECTION OF 1860 The approaching presidential election found the United States as divided in politics as it was in spirit. Republicans had successfully established themselves as the majority party in the free states. Democrats ruled the South, but as in 1856, they could not win nationally without some northern support. President Buchanan had declined to seek a second term, leaving Stephen A. Douglas as the Democratic candidate with the greatest appeal across the sectional divide. Secessionists hated Douglas as a faithless former friend, however, who betrayed them with his Freeport Doctrine and condemnation of the Lecompton constitution, and prominent proslavery Democrats like Mississippi senator Jefferson Davis grew closer to their views. Finally convinced that the Union was doomed, Davis and his friends grimly foresaw that Republican victory could inspire southern voters to demand secession, while the election of Douglas could lead to more vacillation. Davis of Mississippi accordingly introduced a series of Senate resolutions calling for a federal slave code in the territories that would frustrate the inaction of the Freeport Doctrine. He knew that Douglas and his followers could never support his proposal, but southern voters needed a test to separate their true friends from mere pretenders. The Democratic national convention met in April 1860 at Charleston, South Carolina, a hotbed of secessionist sentiment. The convention’s rules gave the North a majority of delegates, though most Democratic votes now came from the South. Led by Alabama fire-eater William Lowndes Yancey, southern delegates echoed Davis’s demand for a federal slave code in the territories, but most northern delegates refused, knowing that consent would doom them back home. When Douglas supporters forced adoption of their own platform, 50 Deep South delegates walked out. The remainder struggled through 57 fruitless ballots to find a nominee, but neither Douglas nor anyone else could gather the necessary two-thirds majority. Jubilant secessionists jeered when the convention finally collapsed and agreed to try again in Baltimore six weeks later. Even deeper divisions split the Baltimore convention. When the northern majority still refused to accept proslavery demands, most southern delegates gave up and assembled separately, where they nominated the incumbent vice president, John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky, on a platform endorsing a federal slave code. Northern Democrats could then give their own nomination to Stephen A. Douglas, --- but returned home furious and depressed, certain that the split in their ranks would forge a Republican victory. The Republicans gathered in Chicago. Their frontrunner was Senator William H. Seward of New York, the distinguished ex-Whig whose endorsement of a “higher law” than the Constitution had given him a radical reputation in the lower North. Having lost these key areas in 1856, Republicans were determined not to make the same mistake. When Seward failed to win the first ballot, other candidates scrambled forward. Passing over several regional favorites, the delegates finally settled on Abraham Lincoln of Illinois. “Honest Abe” was not well-known, but he did have a genuine reputation for honesty and ability, his record was clear, his humble origins personified the promises of free labor, and he came from a crucial swing state. He was not a nativist, moreover, and immigrant votes would help him carry northern cities. The nomination was a remarkable victory for a man who had not held public office for eleven years and whom many Americans had not yet heard of. In their party platform, Republicans condemned John Brown’s raid “as among the gravest of crimes,” but denounced the *Dred Scott* decision as “political heresy” and denied anyone the right “to give legal existence to slavery in any territory of the United States.” They also endorsed a spate of other northern preferences, including a protective tariff, a transcontinental railroad, and federal support for internal improvements. Reflecting their desire to populate the West with free, independent farmers, they also endorsed the Homestead Act to give small portions of public land to settlers. A fourth contestant emerged from a gathering of old-line Whigs, mostly from the Upper South, who called themselves the Constitutional Union Party. Loath to join their ancient enemies in either wing of the Democrats and equally estranged from the supposed radicalism of “Black Republicans,” this Whig remnant endorsed no platform but “**THE CONSTITUTION OF THE COUNTRY, THE UNION OF THE STATES, AND THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE LAWS,**” and chose John Bell of Tennessee as its presidential nominee. In effect, Bell’s candidacy gave the United States two presidential elections: Lincoln against Douglas in the North and Bell against Breckinridge in the South. The ensuing campaign generated unusual excitement. Republicans recruited new voters into “Wide-Awake” clubs and equipped them with inexpensive uniforms for marching in vast torchlight parades. Both Democratic organizations did likewise and Constitutional Unionist demonstrators clanged bells in honor of their candidate. Republi- --- can campaigners dared not venture into the South, and Breckinridge Democrats were scarce in most parts of the North. Consistent with tradition, Lincoln did not campaign personally, but Douglas toured the country and called himself the only truly national candidate. Playing their strongest card against the Republicans, Douglas Democrats repeatedly accused Lincoln of favoring racial equality, often in the crudest terms. Some Republicans fought the Democrats with racist slogans of their own, but others held fast to a moral critique of slavery. Perfectly aware of white Republicans’ shortcomings, Frederick Douglass still endorsed Lincoln and reminded black Americans that Lincoln’s election “must and will be hailed as an antislavery triumph.” Southern voters were especially convinced of the Republicans’ abolitionist leanings. Though the party platform disavowed any federal power over slavery in the states, southern voters heard repeatedly that Lincoln’s victory would spell disaster. Republicans would repeal the Fugitive Slave Act, orators predicted, then abolish slavery in Washington, DC, ban the interstate slave trade, and appoint abolitionist postmasters to organize a southern Republican Party by stirring up the slaves and poor whites. Homes would be torched, infants slaughtered, wives and daughters raped. Rumors swept the region that plots were already afoot, that barns were afire and wells poisoned. Most whites drew a simple conclusion. As Georgia’s Benjamin H. Hill put it, “This government and Black Republicanism cannot live together.” Lincoln’s victory would force the South to save itself by leaving the Union. For their part, Republican voters ignored such talk. They thought the southern charges were absurd and they had heard the threats before. Instead, Douglas and the Republicans tried to warn the South that northerners of both parties viewed secession as profoundly illegal, even treasonous, and would not allow it to succeed. Their efforts fell on deaf ears. In the canvass itself, Lincoln won 54 percent of the free states’ popular votes and all but three of their electoral ballots, for a total of 180 out of 303 electors. He took only 40 percent of the total popular vote, but Lincoln’s majority in the Electoral College would have given him victory even if all his opponents had united against him. Breckinridge, his closest competitor, swept most of the South but gained only 70 electors, while Bell and Douglas fought over scraps among the border states. The strength of the Slave Power seemed crushed. --- # SECESSION WINTER, 1860–1861 As soon as the election results became clear, South Carolina summoned a secession convention. Long a hotbed of disunion, the Palmetto State had hoped for independence as early as 1850, but its movement had faltered when other states refused to join. Refusing the risks of delay this time, the South Carolina convention immediately passed a unanimous ordinance of secession on December 20, 1860, amid widespread public rejoicing. Years later, planter’s wife and daughter Mary Boykin Chesnut remembered the moment vividly. “South Carolina had been so rampant for years,” she reflected. “She was the torment of herself and everybody else. . . . Come what would, I wanted them to fight and stop talking.” Other Deep South states hastened to follow South Carolina’s lead. Mississippi seceded on January 9, joined by Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and then Texas on February 1. Convention elections in these states often pitted immediate secessionists against “cooperationists” who preferred a coordinated action by the whole South to separate action by individual states. Some of the cooperationists probably hoped that delay would cool tempers until the crisis passed; others shared the convictions of the immediate secessionists and simply thought a joint movement would have greater impact. Overall, lines between secessionists and cooperationists followed existing political lines, with Breckinridge Democrats supporting immediate action and Constitutional Unionists and Douglas Democrats favoring delay. Secessionist rhetoric revealed a variety of motives and ambitions. Demands for the right to carry slaves into the territories had long fed the southern rights movement, but withdrawal from the Union would put that goal out of reach, so the secessionists of 1860–1861 reached for deeper motives. Many repeated campaign warnings that slave uprisings and racial equality would follow the Republican victory. Others stressed that submission would degrade southern honor. By choosing Lincoln, the northern majority had declared that southern institutions were inferior to their own, and no self-respecting southerner could accept such a verdict. With no sense of paradox, secessionists appealed to traditional republican values of liberty and equality and linked their cause to the principles of the American Revolution. “We are either *slaves in the union or freemen out of it,*” one Georgian exclaimed. “Defending and protecting the rights . . . which our fathers bequeathed to us,” Jeffer- --- son Davis likewise argued, southerners will “renew such sacrifices as our fathers made.” For secessionists, white liberty depended on black slavery, even for white men who did not own slaves. “Our Abolition enemies . . . are pledged to prostrate the white freemen of the South down to equality with negroes,” they charged. In a society without an enslaved mud-sill, moreover, poor white men would be driven to social depths where equality and self-mastery were impossible. “Freedom,” one secessionist declared simply, “is not possible without slavery.” If such abstractions seemed confusing, other orators made the issue plainer. After Lincoln’s election, they warned, “in TEN years or less our CHILDREN will be the slaves of negroes,” and “abolition preachers will be at hand to consummate the marriage of your daughters to black husbands.” In later years, Confederate sympathizers sometimes explained secession as a defense of “states’ rights.” Participants would surely have agreed, only adding that it was the state’s right to preserve slavery that Lincoln’s election had endangered. Initially, at least, Upper South voters resisted the secession movement. The states of Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas contained deep divisions between upland and low country districts and lower concentrations of slaves and slaveholders than those of the Deep South. Opposition to planter power and slaveholders’ privileges—if not slavery itself—roiled their politics and dampened secessionist fever. Internal diversity drove sharp party rivalries there, preserved distinctions between Whig and Democrat through the late 1850s, and dampened the kind of feverish unanimity that gripped the Deep South. Accustomed to trading places with an opposition, Upper South politicians reasoned that the next election would send Republicans packing if the South would keep its head. The region also had economic ties to the North that secession would rupture. Trapped in the geographic middle, Upper South leaders well knew the passions on both sides and accurately predicted that secession would lead to a long and bloody war that could destroy slavery instead of saving it. Farther northward, the slave states of Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware were even more reluctant to disturb the Union. Upper South states refused to participate, therefore, when the seven seceding states met in Montgomery, Alabama, in February 1861 to form the Confederate States of America, installing Jefferson Davis of Mississippi as its provisional president. Despite his militant posture in recent years, Davis had not been a genuine fire-eater but a “national Democrat” who had hoped to defend southern rights within the Union --- through control of the Democratic Party. Until shortly before his election as president of the Confederacy, Senator Davis had been in Washington, DC, exploring possible compromises with prominent Republicans. When fire-eater William Lowndes Yancey stood on the steps of the Alabama capitol and welcomed Davis by proclaiming, "The man and the hour are met," he surrendered control of "his" movement to a man