*Common Sense*, will not leave members [of the Continental Congress] at a loss to decide upon the propriety of separation." In part, *Common Sense* was so popular because Paine voiced ideas that many Americans believed already, including the linkage between liberty, or freedom from British domination, and equality, or a broader distribution of political power within America. Paine’s ridicule of kingship and hereditary power clearly implied a republican government for America, and strengthened the "revolution from below" by insisting that the citizens of a new American nation should be both free and equal. Public meetings and protests agreed, and increasingly demanded independence to escape from Britain and redistribute power in America. The anti-Stamp Act mobs had protested the authority of men like Thomas Hutchinson as much as the claims of Parliament. Five years later, in 1770, Boston’s artisans had denounced the merchants who wanted to abandon nonimportation, and defended their --- voting rights in town meetings by declaring, "If they had no property, they had liberty, and their posterity might have property." In the spring of 1775, the citizens of Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, not far from the centers of Regulator activity, proclaimed "the former civil Constitution of these colonies for the present wholly suspended," and created their own provisional government, with voting based on militia membership rather than landownership. The next fall, the Philadelphia militia made similar demands, and New York radicals echoed them when the state began to write its own constitution. John Adams, Samuel’s more conservative cousin, had to admit in the spring of 1776 that "a more equal liberty than has prevailed in other parts of the earth must be established in America." ### THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE Still the Second Continental Congress hesitated. Several middle colonies were not ready for independence, and the others would not move without them. The last holdouts were wavering by June 7, 1776, when Richard Henry Lee of Virginia moved a resolution "that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent States." Instead of debating the resolution right away, however, Congress appointed a committee to prepare a declaration of independence: John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Roger Sherman, Robert Livingston, and Thomas Jefferson. Thomas Jefferson was a 33-year-old lawyer and planter from piedmont Virginia. His father had been a respected mapmaker and land surveyor who had risen to moderate prominence and to membership in the House of Burgesses, and Jefferson had gained from his father’s estate the rare opportunity of education at the College of William and Mary. A gifted though eclectic scholar, Jefferson had embraced the ideas of the Enlightenment and England’s Country Party. He especially loved the rational and philosophical study of law, government, and history. Though he inherited most of his father’s land and slaves, he practiced law until marriage with Martha Wayles Skelton doubled the size of his estate and enabled him to begin the plantation he called Monticello. In Virginia’s House of Burgesses, Jefferson gravitated to the radical Whig faction led by Patrick Henry and Richard Henry Lee, but distinguished himself as a brilliant political writer rather than speechmaker. Jefferson’s service at the Second Continental Congress was his first appearance in politics outside Virginia. --- At the committee’s request, Jefferson composed a stirring draft that skillfully blended Whig theory, Enlightenment philosophy, and popular demands from American crowds and legislatures. It opened by asserting that “all men are created equal,” for all possess the same God-given, “unalienable rights.” Legitimate government must respect these rights, or the citizens could change it. Jefferson then insisted that King George had indeed broken the contract and cited a long list of specific violations. This section of the Declaration drew on the old radical Whig notion of a conspiracy against liberty by listing “a long train of abuses and usurpations” that supposedly “evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism.” Jefferson blamed these actions on the king instead of Parliament, not because George III was truly responsible for all of them, but because he was the last link Americans still accepted with Great Britain. Receiving Jefferson’s text, the committee made some revisions and passed it on to Congress, which had approved Lee’s resolution on July 2. Congress polished it still further by clarifying and simplifying several important passages. It also deleted some of Jefferson’s more fanciful complaints, including his claim that the king had foisted the slave trade on innocent Americans, only to incite the slaves against their masters. Jefferson never fully forgave his colleagues for tampering with his words, but he swallowed his resentment for the sake of solidarity. Well aware of the penalty for treason but nervously putting their lives on the line, the delegates adopted the United States Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776, and signed it in the weeks ahead. ### LIBERTY, EQUALITY, AND SLAVERY Through almost constant repetition and invocation, the text of the Declaration of Independence has become a classic, some would say sacred, statement of American values. Certainly its affirmation that “all men are created equal” has become a touchstone of American idealism and a demanding standard for national self-scrutiny. Especially in the twentieth century, however, Americans became painfully aware of the discrepancy between the stern but inspiring demand of human equality and the failure of Jefferson and his society to live up to this standard, particularly on the subject of slavery and race. Paradoxically, there were powerful links between liberty and slavery. As we have seen, seventeenth-century planters had recruited allies against slave revolts by expanding the rights of common white men. Foreign visitors to the colonial South frequently remarked that --- the powerful experience of personal mastery lent special force to the desire for independence in the slaveholding elite. “They are haughty and jealous of their liberties,” one observer wrote as early as 1759, “and can hardly bear the thought of being controlled by any superior power.” Despite their passion for autonomy, however, Virginia’s planters were almost all in deep debt to the British merchants who sold their tobacco and purchased their supplies. The indebted gentry writhed in self-reproach at this situation, claiming that the “Root of our misfortunes is our Pride, our Luxury and Idleness,” but they could not curb the extravagance that proved their rank in a slave society. Thomas Jefferson was no exception to this rule, and he remained deeply in debt his whole life, though never sparing expenses at Monticello. The conflict between the masters’ love of autonomy and ostentation and their embarrassed dependence on their creditors undoubtedly fed their psychological discomfort with colonial subordination and contributed to their support for American independence. In varying degrees, Virginia’s gentry were also aware of the incongruity of demanding liberty for themselves while holding others in bondage. Patrick Henry, who cried “give me liberty or give me death,” called slavery an “abominable practice . . . as repugnant to humanity, as it is inconsistent with the bible, and destructive to liberty,” yet admitted that he could not abandon “the general inconvenience of living without them.” Jefferson expressed similar sentiments, and supported measures to end the African slave trade and to encourage masters to free their slaves voluntarily. His efforts grew weaker over time, however, and he could never bring himself to take a forthright public stand for emancipation or racial equality. What then could Thomas Jefferson and his fellow white Americans have meant by the declaration that “all men are created equal”? Thomas Jefferson knew perfectly well that all people were not alike, but he believed that “all men” had an equal and God-given right to a government that protects their “life, liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.” It probably never occurred to him to expect the same for women, whom he left to the government of their husbands. He did see the conflict between his grand ideals and African slavery, and though he questioned their intellectual abilities, Jefferson never explicitly denied blacks’ fundamental right to liberty. He did believe, however, that rights applied to men within political communities, and blacks were outside the American political community in 1776. Instead of going free immediately, blacks should receive their rights under a government of their own, as soon as white safety would allow it. As Jefferson --- later put it, "We have the wolf by the ear, and we can neither hold him nor safely let him go." His pledges in the Declaration of Independence are thus good examples of statements whose meaning has grown over time, and whose fullest import has rightfully expanded beyond the imaginations of the people who first composed them. ## The Military Challenge The revolutionaries faced a dual challenge. They had to win a war against the most formidable army and navy of the Atlantic world, and build a republican government and society that would retain popular support and justify their daring rebellion. They pursued the two tasks simultaneously, but the military effort had the greatest immediate urgency (see chapter 6 for republican government). The war would not be easy, and both armies faced serious military challenges. Both sides competed for the allegiance of undecided Americans, whose choices would be crucial to the outcome. ### THE CONTINENTAL ARMY George Washington took command of the Continental Army on July 2, 1775. In the years since his youthful scrapes with the French and Indians, he had grown in judgment and estate. His older brothers had died, leaving him substantial property, including the plantation at Mount Vernon and its large force of slaves, and he acquired more by marrying Martha Dandridge Custis, a wealthy widow. As the imperial crisis mounted, Washington had devoted himself to plantation management, served on his Anglican parish vestry, and entered the House of Burgesses. Regarded as strong and wise rather than brilliant, Washington brought to his command maturity, judgment, and steadfastness, in addition to his military experience. The soldiers around Boston were militiamen who expected to go home when the crisis had passed. Reckless civilians boasted that courageous American militiamen, devoted to liberty and hardened by the wilderness, could easily defeat the king’s degraded mercenaries. Washington knew better. In an open battlefield, the iron discipline of professional troops would enable them to stand in crisp blocks firing volley after volley with murderous effectiveness, while the independent-minded militiamen would be all too inclined to break and run. Washington’s first task was to create a permanent force trained to follow orders and execute maneuvers without question or delay. It was --- not an easy task for an army committed to liberty, and Washington and his officers never had more than partial success. As the war continued, they enticed enlistees with cash bounties and 100-acre land grants, some for three-year terms and others for the duration of the war. Desertion remained a problem and recruiting efforts could never slacken. High costs kept both armies small, however, causing British and American generals to launch major battles with less than 2,000–3,000 men on a side. States ultimately required quotas of soldiers from each community, and local committees of safety chose individuals for the service. Sensitive to community pressures, they leaned heavily on the poor and powerless, and allowed affluent draftees to hire substitutes. Over time, the American army increasingly resembled its adversary, filled with disadvantaged young men with limited prospects in the civilian world. Fearful of losing his men, however, Washington never subjected them to the full rigors of British discipline, which included lashings for disobedience and unflinching use of the firing squad against mutiny, cowardice, and desertion. ### THE BRITISH DILEMMA The British Army faced serious problems as well. Most Americans were unfriendly and the terrain was unfamiliar. Transatlantic supply lines were long and fragile. The army could not subdue the dispersed population by capturing a capital city; the rebellion would continue until all rebel armies were destroyed, and each colony pacified. British critics questioned the rationale for the war, arguing that the empire existed for commerce, and that Americans would need to trade their raw materials for British manufactures whether they were independent or not. Why waste lives and money to keep an empire that was already too expensive? Several times before surrender, the king’s generals and ministers were ready to accept this logic, but King George refused to give up. His determination led to difficulties, for the old empire had largely depended on consent. Could an army restore consent by force? If it tried to woo the Americans with gentleness, the impact of force disappeared. If it punished them harshly, it alienated Loyalists and neutrals, and consent would never return. Could the empire survive a fight to preserve it? This dilemma brought indecision and inconsistency to British policy. Generals could never make up their minds about where they --- wanted to be or what they wanted to do, marching endlessly around the country without ever making much progress. Officers often had contempt for all colonials, underestimating the enemy and neglecting their supporters. The treatment of occupied territory shifted from leniency to scorched earth and back again, leaving neutrals with the growing conviction that nothing would return to normal until the British left. Without a clearer idea of why they were in America and what they wanted to accomplish, it was always hard for the British to devise a winning strategy. ### THE LOYALISTS America’s loyal population was a potential British advantage. Known as “Tories” and “traitors” to their enemies, the king’s friends were a mixed group. At the highest level of government, royal governors and other officials deeply believed in the order, justice, and glory of the British Empire. While many leading merchants supported independence, others preferred their business connections to Britain. Some of the “better sort” feared that order, rank, and civility could not survive in republican society. Some ethnic groups did not trust the Anglo-Americans and counted on royal protection. Quakers and the German pacifist sects hated war on principle. Particularly in the South, some backcountry settlers distrusted the planter elite, and clung to the king when the gentry turned rebellious. Also in the South, thousands of slaves were potential enemies of revolutionary masters. All along the frontier, Indian tribes had more to fear from expanding colonists than from distant royalists. Many potential supporters had little interest in the principles of monarchy but might respond to tact and persuasion. Neutrals would live with either side. When diehards persisted, states levied heavy penalties on Loyalists, including extra taxation, confiscation of property, and even banishment for those who refused to swear oaths of allegiance to the new governments. In rough fractions, perhaps three-fifths of the American population truly supported independence, one fifth gave active support to the Crown, and the remainder showed varying degrees of neutrality. ### The Course of War For three years, revolutionary fighting centered in the middle Atlantic region, as successive British commanders pursued the Continen- --- tals through New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Americans also defeated a British invasion from Canada, an impressive victory with important diplomatic consequences. The war then shifted to the South, where a British offensive destabilized slavery and sparked fierce guerilla warfare but could not destroy its adversary. When Britain’s weary army camped by the Chesapeake for resupply by sea, quick maneuvers by French and American forces trapped them at Yorktown, Virginia. Britain then conceded defeat and recognized American independence in 1783. ### FIGHTING IN THE NORTH After the fiasco at Bunker Hill, the ministry replaced General Thomas Gage with his subordinate, General Sir William Howe. Trapped in Boston for the winter of 1775–1776, Howe withdrew by sea to Nova Scotia and then decided to attack New York. Joining with an overland force from Canada, he planned to occupy the Hudson Valley, isolate New England, and choke the rebellion. In July 1776, Howe began landing 32,000 men, including 8,000 Hessians, on Staten Island. Marching from Boston in pursuit, the Continentals could not prevail when Howe attacked them on Long Island in late August. The Americans retreated to Manhattan and then to northern New Jersey, where Howe followed and defeated them whenever he made contact, but they always slipped away before suffering a deathblow. When Washington’s army reached safety in Pennsylvania, Howe gave up the chase and returned to New York, leaving a Hessian garrison to hold Trenton, New Jersey. Then Washington turned the tables. Recrossing the Delaware River with a small force of 2,400 men, he surprised and captured the Hessians on December 26, 1776. The victory lifted American spirits and demonstrated that quick movements and clever escapes could preserve the Continental Army and its fragile revolution. Britain resumed the offensive in the summer of 1777, but stumbled from miscommunication. In England, General John Burgoyne revived the idea of cutting off New England by seizing the Lake Champlain / Hudson River corridor from Canada to New York City. He won command of the march south from Canada while another force would come from Lake Erie to join him at Albany. Success depended on Howe’s presence in New York City, but Howe did not hear about these plans and sailed his army to Philadelphia instead. Washington could not prevent Howe’s capture of Philadelphia, but the rest of the summer and fall went more successfully. An American --- force in New York’s Mohawk River Valley repulsed the invasion from Lake Erie. Burgoyne descended from Canada and retook Fort Ticonderoga on Lake Champlain, but collapsed farther south at the Battle of Saratoga, and surrendered his entire army to General Horatio Gates in October 1777. Far away in Paris, the Saratoga victory proved American strength to the French government, leading to French recognition of the United States and a crucial French-American alliance. To spend the approaching winter, Washington’s army found a hilly, unpromising refuge called Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, which was easily defended but lacked convenient supplies of water, food, fodder, and most other necessities. While the British warmed themselves in Philadelphia, Washington’s 11,000 men suffered bitterly for lack of food, clothing, and shelter. They were sure that neighboring farmers had plenty to eat and were selling ample supplies for British money, but like his British counterparts, Washington refused to seize supplies for fear of a backlash. There was no solution but to drill and suffer, and the soldiers did both until the spring of 1778, when General Sir Henry Clinton replaced William Howe as senior British commander and moved the army back to New York. Washington attacked his troops on the way, but could not halt their progress. ### DIPLOMACY AND THE FRONTIER The major land battles of the American War for Independence took place along the Atlantic seaboard, but conditions in Europe and the trans-Appalachian frontier both had major implications for its outcome. As early as 1775, the First Continental Congress had used agents to seek money and weapons in France and elsewhere in Europe. To the west, American settlers pressed continuously against the Indian lands, and Britain angered Americans when it responded with the Proclamation Line of 1763. With the outbreak of war, the United States pressed harder for European support, and the British recruited Indians to attack Americans from the rear. Britain and France were traditional adversaries, and a chance to undermine Britain always appealed to French diplomats. In the Seven Years’ War, Britain and Spain had taken France’s American empire, so American independence could even the score by salving French pride and injuring British commerce. American merchants had long wanted to defy the Navigation Acts and trade directly with France, moreover, so a wartime partnership could interest both sides. Cooperation would --- not come easily, however. Louis XVI had no love of republican revolutions (he later lost his head in one) and Protestant Americans had deep-seated fears about French Catholicism. After declaring independence, the Second Continental Congress named a commission headed by Benjamin Franklin to negotiate with France. Franklin was immediately popular in Paris as a plainspoken emblem of American simplicity, but his commission worked without success for nearly a year to win French recognition of the United States and entry into its war. When Americans proved their staying power at the Battle of Saratoga, King Louis and his advisors put caution aside, recognized American independence, and signed a treaty of alliance and a treaty of amity and commerce in February 1778. A few months later, France declared war on Britain and sent an army and navy to America. Eventually, France’s ally Spain also declared war on Britain (without a formal treaty with the United States), giving additional support to the campaign for independence. If France and the United States had common interests, so did the British and the Native Americans. French defeat in the Seven Years’ War had cost the Indians an ally and encouraged American efforts to cross the mountains into the Ohio Valley. The intruders included squatters who built homes and farms without a legal title, and large-scale land speculators who would need legal authorization to resell plots to more cautious settlers. North Carolina hunter Daniel Boone served the Transylvania Company, which sought to buy most of modern Kentucky from the tribes who hunted there. In 1775, Boone defied the Proclamation Line and marked a trail that became known as the Wilderness Road, across the North Carolina mountains, through the Cumberland Gap, and into central Kentucky’s lush bluegrass region, where he founded the town of Boonesborough. Indians tried to take advantage of the colonial dispute to reverse such incursions. Armed by the British, the Cherokees attacked white settlements in what is now eastern Tennessee in 1776. Militia from the Carolinas, Georgia, and Virginia struck back hard, inflicting numerous casualties, and burning over 50 Cherokee towns along with their food, fields, and livestock. Most Cherokees sought peace in 1777 and surrendered their lands in South Carolina and much of Tennessee, but the Chickamauga band of Chief Dragging Canoe kept fighting until 1794. Similar events unfolded among the Iroquois. In 1775, the Continental Congress had sought the neutrality of the Six Nations by assuring them, “This is a family quarrel