a political war broke out pitting Lieutenant Governor Thomas Hutchinson (a wealthy merchant who later became chief justice of Massachusetts) and his privileged friends and family against a popular movement that called itself the Caucus. The two factions battled for years, first over Hutchinson’s effort to abolish the Boston town meeting, and then over customs enforcement. Both factions were thus well primed to react to the inflammatory Stamp Act. Hutchinson had privately lobbied against the law, but still wrangled the profitable office of stamp distributor for his brother-in-law Andrew Oliver. On August 14, 1765, a hanged effigy of Oliver appeared prominently in Boston, and Governor Francis Bernard could not find anyone brave enough to take it down. Ebenezer MacIntosh, a shoemaker and chief organizer of Pope’s Day, gathered his followers to denounce the governor, destroy the suspected new stamp office, burn the effigy with its wreckage, and break the windows of Oliver’s house. Believing that Hutchinson favored the Stamp Act, MacIntosh led another mob two weeks later in attacking and demolishing his elegant townhouse. Soon afterward, Andrew Oliver stood at the foot of Boston’s Liberty Tree to publicly resign the office of stamp distributor. There was no inherent reason why leading colonists’ fight for “liberty,” or freedom from British taxation, should also have led to a fight for “equality,” or a broader distribution of power within America. In other words, the merchants, lawyers, and gentry who were most affected by the Stamp Act might have opposed it without losing their power over lower-ranking colonists. Nevertheless, protesting gentle- --- men recruited artisans and laborers by invoking their equal rights to the liberties of freeborn Englishmen. Men like MacIntosh and his followers responded to their appeals, even though the Stamp Act—mostly a tax on legal and commercial documents—was unlikely to weigh on them heavily. Artisans did know that nonimportation would benefit them by cutting off foreign trade and increasing demand for their own products. Just as important, perhaps, they also knew that Thomas Hutchinson and his friends were wealthy, powerful, arrogant, and longstanding enemies of the “mob.” Attacking Hutchinson would not only defend their liberty from arbitrary taxation, but it could also bring them more equality, or greater political power in Massachusetts. The entry of men like MacIntosh was therefore a step toward what historians now describe as a “revolution from below” that developed alongside the gentry’s “revolution from above,” sometimes cooperatively and sometimes in conflict. As political clashes mounted, demands for liberty and equality for those “below” would only grow stronger. In the short run, most (but not all) the participants in this popular revolution were white men of modest means. Over time, their participation set a precedent that other Americans used and still use for broader claims to liberty and equality. Riots like those in Boston broke out against stamp distributors in Newport, Rhode Island, and New York. Sons of Liberty confronted stamp distributors from New Hampshire to Georgia and forced them to resign. By the time the stamped paper arrived in most ports, there was no one on hand with the authority to receive it, and crowds compelled local officials to resume port business without using it. Mob violence had nullified the law. Protests did not stop with the future United States. Except for Quebec, all the colonies had significant English populations who boasted of liberty and balanced government, though slaves far outnumbered whites in the Caribbean. Just as in Boston, Newport, and New York, mobs on Nevis and St. Kitts destroyed supplies of stamped paper and forced the stamp distributors to resign. Jamaica’s stamp distributor complained of “repeated Threats of Violence, Torrents of Personal abuse and many other very disagreeable Circumstances,” and was finally burned in effigy. According to their governor, West Floridians viewed the stamps as “badges of slavery.” On the whole, however, the Canadian and Caribbean colonies kept their protests moderate. Britain maintained a strong military presence in both regions, guarding against foreign attack and the very real possibility of Caribbean slave --- revolts, but the troops could also silence protesters. West Indies merchants and planters depended on the Navigation Acts for protected markets in Britain, and while they grumbled at parliamentary interference, they would not endanger their privileged position. Most Nova Scotians had come from New England, but they depended heavily on military spending, and the Crown controlled their government tightly, while French-speaking Quebec lacked British political traditions of self-government. The thirteen mainland colonies from New Hampshire to Georgia thus remained the centers of protest against the Stamp Act and subsequent taxes by Parliament, as well as the independence movement that followed. Back in London, merchants complained that colonial boycotts hurt their business, and their voices carried more weight than those of the colonists. Parliament gave in and repealed the Stamp Act in March 1766, but it also passed a Declaratory Act asserting that it had "full power and authority ... to bind the colonies and people of *America* ... in all cases whatsoever." Ignoring this pronouncement, Americans greeted repeal with toasts, bonfires, and jubilant celebrations. They did not ask if Parliament had truly renounced its intention of taxing them, or if British and American understandings of public liberties were the same. Time proved that they were not. ### POLITICAL THEORY What can explain the extraordinary upheaval against the Stamp Act? The tax would cost money, of course, and the combined effects of the Currency Act and a postwar economic downturn would magnify its burden, but Americans knew that some taxation was inevitable. Back in Britain, the common people quietly submitted to a much heavier tax burden than Americans. Why then should normally law-abiding subjects resort to violence against this modest and arguably necessary measure? As revealed in the language of protest, Americans had absorbed a set of political ideas that made the possibility of parliamentary taxation seem not just costly but intolerably dangerous. Some of these ideas came from the Puritan notion of covenant, which taught that government was a sacred responsibility and that God would punish those who tolerated its abuses. Enlightenment philosopher John Locke had likewise argued that human government rested on a social contract between the people and their rulers. If rulers broke that contract as --- James II had done, men could and should resist them. By attempting to take Americans’ property without their consent, Parliament appeared to have broken this fundamental bargain. Americans also remembered the early eighteenth-century English radicals who had called themselves the Real Whigs, or the Country Party. These writers had denounced their own government as massively corrupt, a mockery of rule by consent, and bent on despotism. Almost everywhere they looked, Country Party writers saw secret plots to “enslave” the British people by taking control of their opinions, persons, and property. Following their example, colonial writers like Rhode Island’s Stephen Hopkins linked “slavery” to taxation without consent. “Those who are governed at the will of another, or of others, and whose property may be taken from them by taxes, or otherwise, without their own consent, and against their will,” he explained, “are in the miserable condition of slaves.” The Whig political tradition was so important to protesting Americans that they began to call themselves “Whigs,” while condemning supporters of the king and Parliament as “Tories.” The fear of enslavement did not seem far-fetched to many Americans, perhaps because real slavery already surrounded them. “Preferring death to slavery,” North Carolina’s Sons of Liberty succinctly explained, “we will . . . unite . . . in preventing entirely the operation of the Stamp Act.” The Boston town meeting was more elaborate but just as certain. “If Taxes are laid upon us in any shape without ever having a Legal Representation where they are laid,” it demanded, “are we not reduced from the Character of Free Subjects to the miserable state of Tributary Slaves?” Country Party writers stressed the importance of what they called public virtue, which included ordinary morality but also a willingness to sacrifice personal pleasures for the common good. They loudly warned that ambitious tyrants would undermine both. “They will promote luxury, idleness, and expence, and a general depravation of manners,” Cato had predicted. “From immorality and excesses [the people] will fall into necessity; and from thence into a servile dependence upon power.” A certain measure of economic and social equality was also necessary to protect virtue and liberty, Cato insisted, because “where there is inequality of estates there must be inequality of power,” and excessively powerful men would surely take liberty from others to satisfy their own corrupt desires. Cato’s admirers thus tied liberty and equality to a secular version --- of Puritanism. Boston activist Samuel Adams braided Country Party rhetoric with revival sermons and jeremiads to prophesy that parliamentary taxation would corrupt Massachusetts with “standing armies and ships of war; episcopates [i.e., Anglican bishops] and their numerous ecclesiastical retinue; pensioners, placemen and other jobbers, for an abandoned and shameless ministry; hirelings, pimps, parasites, panders, prostitutes, and whores.” In the wake of Boston’s anti-impressment riots, his popular newspaper had foreshadowed later disputes by tying political and social or economic grievances together. “All men are by nature on a level,” it declared, “born with an equal share of freedom, and endowed with capacities equally alike.” His cousin John Adams explained more simply that “liberty can no more exist without virtue and independence, than the body can live and move without a soul.” American realities lent credence to radical Whig predictions. Without intending despotism, the Crown did expect royal governors to strengthen their powers and control unruly assemblies, so colonial politics did resemble the endless struggle between rulers and subjects that Cato had predicted. As America’s economy and society grew beyond frontier simplicity, the consumer revolution introduced previously unknown luxuries, distance widened between rich and poor, and overcrowding and land scarcity threatened to bring English-style poverty to America. Pamphleteers warned that the real purpose of parliamentary taxation was to hasten this process, strip American freeholders of their little farms and reduce them all to tenancy and want. “If the breath of a British house of commons can ... [take] away all our money,” a Boston meeting reasoned, “our lands will go next or be subject to rack rents from haughty and relentless landlords who will ride at ease, while we are trodden in the dirt.” Prosperity led colonists to import more British products, moreover, and then to fret that luxury might corrupt them. While Englishmen lived with much heavier taxes, even the most moderate and level-headed Americans saw parliamentary taxes as leading to despotism. # The Contagion of Liberty Wealthy and well-educated Americans had better opportunities to study political theory than artisans, farmers, and laborers. Stamp Act protesters had reached beyond the elite, however, to rally the “lower” and the “middling” sorts against the threat to liberty. As they did, what --- some writers called the "contagion of liberty" spread through the American social order, arousing rich and poor, town and country, and members of excluded groups such as women and African Americans. Beginning as a defense of privileges for the "better sort," the campaign for colonial rights slowly broadened under new rounds of parliamentary taxes, and led to demands for greater equality inside American society. ### PROTESTING THE TOWNSHEND DUTIES Charles Townshend became the king’s chief minister in 1767. Like George Grenville, Townshend believed that the colonies must submit to Parliament and pay their share of imperial expenses. To replace the Stamp Act, he asked Parliament for import duties on certain products that the colonists regularly bought from abroad: lead, paper, glass, painter’s colors, and tea. He hoped Americans would accept these duties because they were external taxes (like the Molasses Act and Sugar Act) on overseas commerce, rather than internal taxes (like the Stamp Act) on transactions inside the colonies. Philadelphia lawyer John Dickinson attacked this distinction in his persuasive pamphlet *Letters from a Pennsylvania Farmer*. The Townshend Duties were just as bad as the Stamp Act, he argued, because they still raised revenue without popular consent. Collections would pay the salaries of governors and other royal officials, moreover, stripping assemblies of the power to coerce officials by refusing to pay them. Instead of backing down, the ministry raised more fears by moving frontier troops to the seaports, supposedly to cut costs, while Parliament strengthened the notorious vice-admiralty courts and created a centralized customs office for America. Radical minds saw threats to liberty in all these measures, but it was not until February 1768 that the Massachusetts assembly adopted a circular letter to other colonies calling for peaceful measures of resistance. Lord Hillsborough, the newly appointed secretary of state for the colonies, unwisely demanded that Massachusetts rescind this circular and forbade the other legislatures to accept it, which only strengthened their determination to discuss whatever they wished. Governors then dissolved the defiant assemblies, fulfilling radical warnings that corrupt rulers would abolish free government to silence dissent. Attempted intimidation brought a new round of nonimportation --- agreements against the Townshend Duties. The Sons of Liberty resumed attacks on defiant merchants, and soldiers could not stop them without provoking further violence. The boycotts brought hard times to the Boston docks, where sailors and laborers competed with off-duty soldiers for scarce employment. Clashes mounted in streets and taverns until March 5, 1770, when sailors, laborers, and apprentices began pelting a small group of soldiers with snowballs, rocks, and catcalls. Pressed too far, the redcoats fired back and killed five rioters, including a free black sailor named Crispus Attucks. Publicists dubbed this incident the Boston Massacre and illustrated it with gory lithographs depicting the wanton slaughter of aggrieved and harmless civilians. The truth was more complicated, but when soldiers fired on an unarmed mob, ordinary colonists concluded that the orators and pamphleteers were right: British forces threatened liberty. Farmers, artisans, laborers, and even dockside toughs fought back with more demonstrations, hangings in effigy, and rounds of angry speeches fortified with strong drink and stronger language. With tacit approval from colonial leaders, property was damaged and people got hurt. As violence escalated, angry crowds connected the gentry’s protests with their own grievances and applied the lessons of liberty to their own lives. These developments were still invisible in London, where the government had changed hands again. Lord Frederick North, the new chief minister, supported Britain’s right to tax the colonies, but he would not fight for the unpopular policies of his predecessor. He responded to the boycotts by asking Parliament to repeal all the Townshend Duties but one, keeping the tax on tea for the sake of principle. ## RURAL PROTESTS Social and economic tension did not stop at coastal ports in the 1760s. When military spending slackened at the end of the Seven Years’ War, credit shrank and crop prices fell in a sharp economic contraction, punishing farmers just as tighter enforcement of the Navigation Acts barred their crops from foreign markets. New York’s manorial landlords tried to boost their incomes with higher rents and shorter leases, but their tenants fought back with rent strikes and riots. Dispossessed local Indians also came forward and convinced many tenants that the patroons had never purchased their lands, so they had no right to collect rents from their vast manors. In 1765, officials evicted and jailed Philipse Manor tenants when they refused give up their long leases. --- for shorter agreements that could lead to higher rents, but hundreds of angry farmers marched on New York City to free them. “Mobs had overcome Kings before,” their leader warned, “and why should they not overcome now?” In this environment, unrest spread quickly to rural districts, and white farmers followed townspeople in protesting with the language of liberty. Economic problems were especially acute in Virginia, where yeomen and planters had spent freely on expensive imports when tobacco sold well but could not pay their debts when its price fell. Many Virginians blamed themselves and lashed their consciences for overspending, but could not give up the purchases that proclaimed their status. “From immorality and excesses we fall into necessity,” wailed a writer in the *Virginia Gazette*, echoing Cato, “and this leads us to a servile dependence on power, and fits us to the chains prepared for us.” Others blamed the imperial system itself and decided that conditions would improve if the Navigation Acts allowed them to produce their own manufactures, avoid British middlemen, and trade directly with foreign buyers. “*Britain* from her exclusive trade to these colonies, and from the manner in which she tied up our manufacturing hands,” despaired prominent planter Richard Henry Lee, “involved the people here in very heavy debt, which agriculture, without arts, and a trade so confined, will probably never pay.” The Currency Act only made repayment harder. When Virginia sought to loosen credit with a government-owned loan office, and tried to control costs and limit tobacco production by halting slave imports, Britain said no. Nor could Virginians escape their problems on new lands beyond the mountains, for the Proclamation Line of 1763 had reserved this territory for the Indians. Tempers mounted as Virginians realized that liberty had practical as well as theoretical value. Farther south, rural tension pitted the Carolina backcountry against low-country elites. The great planters who dominated South Carolina’s assembly were very suspicious of upland pioneers. Not trusting these poor, unruly strangers with the power to elect assemblymen, the planter gentry refused to give them courts, county governments, or other institutions of law and order. Horse thieves and cattle rustlers roamed above the fall line until vigilantes called Regulators began dishing out rough justice after 1765. Violence did not diminish until 1769, when the legislature finally established courts for the area. In North Carolina, a different group of Regulators protested corruption in their local governments. Their assembly had been all too ready to establish local courts, stocking them with venal officials who --- lined their pockets by collecting local taxes with oppressive severity and embezzling the proceeds. "The sons of Liberty withstood the Lords in Parliament in behalf of true Liberty," the Regulators complained in 1766, so "let not Officers under them carry on unjust Oppression in our own Province." When petitions failed and violent mobs disrupted western courts, Governor William Tryon mobilized 1,200 eastern militiamen in 1771 and marched west to crush the disorder. After a two-hour battle at Great Alamance Creek, he scattered 2,000 insurgents and hanged 7 others. Ironically, most of North Carolina’s leading revolutionaries were eastern leaders who fought with Tryon in this conflict, but the clash taught frontier yeoman to distrust both coastal slaveholders and British officials. Whether in New York, Virginia, or the Carolinas, it is difficult to draw direct lines between rural protests of the 1760s and 1770s and the opposing sides of the American Revolution. Sometimes dissenters sided with the drive for independence, sometimes they were neutral, and sometimes they concluded that the Whig gentry were more dangerous than the Crown. It is clear, however, that rural America was subject to increasing social and political tensions in the late colonial era and that frontier farmers were learning to apply the rhetoric of liberty for themselves. ### DAUGHTERS OF LIBERTY Calls for liberty also touched American women, for assumptions about proper sex roles deeply colored ideas about public life. Like most rights, liberty belonged to men, not women. Condemning the effects of the consumer revolution on liberty, virtue, and masculinity, John Adams praised "manly" resistance to tyranny but denounced dependence on British goods as "vicious, luxurious, and effeminate." Conflict with the "mother country" still had deep implications for American women. Their shopping habits determined the effectiveness of the nonimportation agreements. They spun and wove American cloth when men renounced British imports. Newspapers, essayists, and ministers urged the "Daughters of Liberty" to practice their public virtue by rejecting British frippery and making essentials at home. In an incident known as the Edenton Tea Party, North Carolina ladies committed themselves to nonimportation, while their counterparts elsewhere took their spinning wheels out of storage to make homespun in public displays of patriotism. Milcah Martha Moore of Philadelphia used rhyme to protest the Townshend Duties, explicitly con- --- trasting the patriotism of women, who lacked public rights, to the venality of men, who might succumb to pro-British temptations: > If the Sons (so degenerate) the Blessing despise, > Let the Daughters of Liberty, nobly arise, > And tho’ we’ve no voice, but a negative here > The use of the Taxables, let us forbear. Sentiments like these did not lead immediately to legal changes in the position of American women, but they fed the idea that women could and must be public spirited in their own ways. In the generation after independence, American women would continue to build on these ideas to fashion a concept of female citizenship and public service that extended from the home to the larger community. ### THE RHETORIC AND REALITY OF SLAVERY When whites complained of British “slavery,” African Americans demanded freedom as well. In 1765, Henry Laurens of South Carolina watched approvingly as Stamp Act protesters chanted, *“Liberty Liberty and stamp’d paper.”* Three months later, he and other white townsmen shuddered and put the whole province on alert when slaves followed suit and shouted “Liberty” in the streets of Charles Town. Some white Americans were painfully aware of the contradictions between their words