losses, and the hardest fighting still lay ahead. Temporarily out of power, General Santa Anna hinted that he would arrange a Mexican surrender if Americans would help him regain the presidency. Polk cooperated, but once in office, the crafty general changed course and led an army northward against Taylor. In February 1847, Taylor’s smaller forces triumphed at the Battle of Buena Vista, but when Santa Anna vowed to fight on, Polk concluded that the war could not end without the capture of Mexico City. --- To achieve this goal, the American commander General Winfield Scott landed at Veracruz on Mexico’s Caribbean coast in March 1847, and inflicted heavy civilian casualties when he bombarded and captured the city. Fighting their way over the mountains, his troops faced heat, humidity, insects, disease, a dearth of supplies, and fierce resistance, but finally reached the capital’s outskirts in August 1847. A series of desperate battles followed, climaxed by the siege and capture of the fortress of Chapultepec. Americans entered Mexico City and its “halls of the Montezumas” on September 14, 1847. Among them was Nicholas Trist, a secret peace commissioner dispatched by Polk. His instructions called for a settlement much like the one John Slidell had demanded: New Mexico, California, and a Rio Grande border, in exchange for $20 million. Goaded by victory, some excited supporters of Manifest Destiny demanded that the United States press forward until it could annex “all Mexico.” “It is an outrage, for the Mexicans to own such a country,” ran a common sentiment, repeated in the letter of an Alabama volunteer. “They are too lazy to till the soil, they make no improvements in the implements or mode of culture and make but few improvements whatever in the useful or mechanic arts or in civilization.” Casually adapting older notions of white superiority over Native Americans, another concluded, “The same fate will await them that happen to the Indian tribes of our own frontier. They will naturally vanish before civilization.” The *Illinois State Register* was even harsher. Mexicans “are reptiles in the path of progressive democracy,” it proclaimed. “They must either crawl or be crushed.” Opponents replied that inferior Mexicans could not be American citizens or ruled against their will. Henry Clay led most Whigs to decline all annexations. The war sputtered on as arguments continued, despite the capture of Mexico City. Guerillas harassed the American occupiers and General Santa Anna made a final, unsuccessful attempt to cut Scott’s supply lines to the coast. Provoked by continued resistance, Polk decided that his instructions had been too generous and recalled Trist before he reached an agreement. Remarkably, Trist refused to obey and kept negotiating, convinced that the president did not understand how excessive demands would only lead to more bloodshed. Just as remarkably, Trist’s defiance paid off. In February 1848, he and Mexican negotiators signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, giving California, New Mexico, and the Rio Grande border to the United States in exchange for $15 million and US payment of Mexico’s debts to Ameri- --- cans. The United States also promised to respect Mexican land grants and property rights, to extend US citizenship to Mexican residents of the area, and to protect the new border from Indian raids, but later resisted the implementation of those pledges. Despite his larger ambitions and his anger at Trist, Polk decided to accept the deal as the best he could get, knowing that congressional Whigs might block a resumption of fighting. The Senate ratified the treaty a month later, officially ending the US-Mexican War. # The Poisoned Fruits of Manifest Destiny The Mexican War brought 619,000 square miles of new territory to the United States, including virtually all of the modern states of California, Arizona, Nevada, and Utah, with large parts of Texas, Colorado, and New Mexico. It cost the lives of 13,000 Americans, 2,000 from wounds and the rest from disease. By securing Oregon as well, President Polk increased American territory by almost one-third and stretched US boundaries to the approximate contours of the contiguous 48 states of the twentieth century. Americans were not yet sure what they could do with so much unfamiliar wilderness, but they were delighted to have the prize and eager to imagine its future. They quickly, discovered, however, that some of their plans for the region were radically incompatible. The Comanches and other Plains Indians would violently resist the American takeover. More pressing in the short run, would the new lands have a place for slavery, the cherished institution of white southerners? Or should the nation declare its preference for freedom by excluding slavery from the West? The new lands touched off a massive national debate over the expansion of slavery, even before they were firmly in hand. Ever deepening over the 1850s, the dispute would finally end in civil war. Many practically minded leaders deplored this debate, insisting that climate and terrain made plantation slavery impossible in the West, no matter what the government did, but their pleas could never quell the controversy. Western geography was so poorly understood that no one really knew what would grow there. It was also possible that western states where slavery was legal might support the South without containing many actual slaves. Most fundamentally, the struggle over slavery in the territories expressed Americans’ deepest desires for the future of the republic. In this desperate clash of dreams and fears, geographical details had limited significance. --- # THE WILMOT PROVISO CONTROVERSY In the years since the rise of abolitionism, antislavery sentiment had spread unevenly across the North. Few white northerners wanted immediate emancipation or racial equality, yet many admitted that slavery was unjust to blacks and gave masters too much power over other whites. Others simply tired of slaveholders’ seemingly endless and arrogant demands for deference and protection. Without embracing abolitionism, they increasingly favored a policy called “free soil,” which would limit slavery to the existing slave states and reserve the West for freedom. If slavery stopped growing, they reasoned, it might disappear eventually. Even if it did not, free soil and free labor would protect the West from the blighting effects of slavery. In keeping with their reform traditions, northern Whigs were most receptive to antislavery ideas, but free-soil principles were also spreading among northern Democrats who resented southern domination of their party. Party activists remembered that southerners had barred Martin Van Buren from the presidential ticket in 1844 because he would not risk a war for Texas, a future slave state. They wondered why Polk had given up half of “their” Oregon territory, only to fight for all of Texas and then some. They also complained that Polk favored the South on tariffs, internal improvements, and patronage. The most sensitive began to suspect the existence of a conspiratorial “Slave Power,” even more sinister than Nicolas Biddle’s “Money Power,” that could twist the government in a proslavery, pro-southern direction at every turn. In December 1845, some of these free-soil Democrats joined northern Whigs to repeal the hated gag rule against antislavery petitions, but the president ignored their underlying complaints. As Congress approached adjournment in August 1846, the president requested a last-minute appropriation of $2 million in response to rumors that Mexico would make peace and surrender vast territories for the right price. The House was about to agree when Representative David Wilmot, a disgruntled Democrat from Pennsylvania, proposed an explosive condition. Polk could have the money, Wilmot offered, under the following condition: *“Provided, That, as an express and fundamental condition to the acquisition of territory from the Republic of Mexico by the United States . . . neither slavery nor involuntary servitude shall ever exist in any part of said territory, except for crime, whereof the party shall first be duly convicted.”* The so-called Wilmot Proviso enjoyed historical precedent, for --- it simply applied to the Mexican Cession the antislavery policy that Thomas Jefferson had proposed for the Old Northwest in 1784 and Congress had adopted in the Northwest Ordinance of 1787. Wilmot was no abolitionist, however, and held no sympathy for African Americans. He simply wanted to protect white settlers from black competition. As he boasted later, > "I plead the cause of the rights of white freemen. I would preserve for free white labor a fair country, a rich inheritance, where the sons of toil, of my own race and own color, can live without the disgrace which association with negro slavery brings upon free labor." Regardless of its motive, the Wilmot Proviso landed in Congress like a bombshell and outraged southern representatives. It clearly implied that a slave-based society was inferior to freedom. Though southern volunteers had won the Mexican War, under the proviso their cherished way of life would be banned forever in the lands they conquered. Southerners stridently denounced Wilmot’s disruptive ploy, but free soil was so popular that northern congressmen dared not vote against it. The Wilmot Proviso quickly passed the House of Representatives on a strictly sectional vote, but died in the Senate as the session expired. Congress reassembled in December 1847. Once again, Polk requested money to end the war, and once again, his opponents countered with the Wilmot Proviso. No one had changed his mind, and the ensuing debate revealed four basic approaches to the controversy. First, northern free-soilers embraced the proviso and insisted that Congress could and should exclude slavery from all federal territories, including those surrendered by Mexico. Some boasted openly that a free West would undermine slavery in the South. > "We will establish a cordon of free states that shall surround you," an Ohio congressman taunted his southern rivals, "and then we will light up the fires of liberty on every side until they melt your present chains and render all your people free." Second, southerners denounced such predictions, but feared they might be true. If slavery were bottled up, masters could not export a growing black population. Slave prices would collapse and many whites would flee, forcing the others to abolish slavery or face a race war. Southern Democrats were especially convinced that slavery must expand or die. Always less keen for expansion and less sure of the need for it, southern Whigs still resented the proviso’s moral stigma. Planting their feet, angry southerners insisted that Congress had no right to ban slaves from *any* federal territory. --- Senator John C. Calhoun made their case in a series of Senate resolutions. The federal territories were the common property of all the states, he declared, and all US citizens had equal rights within them. That included the equal right to bring in their property, including slaves. Any law blocking slavery from the federal territories was therefore unconstitutional, including the Wilmot Proviso or even the Missouri Compromise. Third, President Polk and Secretary of State James Buchanan of Pennsylvania wanted an alternative to the sectional extremes represented by Wilmot and Calhoun, and offered to extend the Missouri Compromise line to the Pacific, banning slavery north of 36°30' and permitting it to the south. Despite their constitutional scruples against banning slavery from any territory, southerners accepted this solution but free-soilers did not. They would not tolerate any expansion of slavery, especially since the West was already free territory under Mexican law. Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan proposed a fourth solution called "popular sovereignty." He suggested that Congress respect both northern and southern sensibilities by refusing to adopt any blanket policy on slavery in the territories. Instead, the settlers in each territory should decide the question for themselves. Like the extension of the 36°30' line, however, popular sovereignty clashed with the constitutional argument against allowing anyone—whether Congress or the voters—to ban slavery from territory that belonged to all the states alike. Cass also failed to specify just when a territory could exercise the free-soil option. Was it during the earliest phase of territorial self-government? If so, the two sides might launch a race or even a battle to see who could settle the territory fastest. Or was it afterward, when a territory prepared to enter the Union as a state? Slavery would then remain legal to the moment of statehood, allowing slaveholders an initial foothold that later settlers might never dislodge. As attractive as it seemed on the surface, the doctrine of popular sovereignty was fraught with opportunities for bitter conflict. ### THE ELECTION OF 1848 Congress finally granted Polk the money he needed to conclude the Mexican War without including the Wilmot Proviso. Free-soilers promised to keep raising the issue of slavery in the Mexican Cession, however, as attention turned to the presidential election of 1848. --- James K. Polk was not a candidate because his health was failing, and he had always promised not to seek a second term. Ill and exhausted, Polk would die only months after leaving the White House. In his place, Lewis Cass captured the Democratic nomination by equivocating about the meaning of popular sovereignty to gratify voters in both sections. The Whigs also sidestepped controversy by adopting no platform and nominating General Zachary Taylor for president. Taylor was popular in the North as a war hero with no political record, while southerners liked the pair of cotton plantations and over 100 slaves he owned in Louisiana and Mississippi. In the North, three dissenting factions joined in the small but significant Free Soil Party. They included some New York Democrats known as “Barnburners” who still resented Van Buren’s defeat in 1844, a group of “Conscience Whigs” from Massachusetts who resented the proslavery leanings of those they called “Cotton Whigs,” and abolitionists from the old Liberty Party of 1844. Nominating Martin Van Buren (even though the former president had always hated party dissidents and shrugged off slavery), the Free Soil Party championed the Wilmot Proviso and foreshadowed the political alignment that would dominate the North by the end of the following decade. Zachary Taylor triumphed in this three-way contest. With the Democrats split, northerners could support him as a Whig and a war hero, while southerners saw him as one of their own. The Free Soil Party lost everywhere, but out-polled the Democrats in New York, Massachusetts, and Vermont, a forceful reminder that proslavery stances could alienate the North and fracture its party alignments. ## DEADLOCK FOLLOWS PEACE After the election, a deeply divided Congress reassembled to confront additional complexities. The war was fully over by this time, the peace treaty ratified, and the territories had officially changed hands. Following up on their Bear Flag Revolt, Californians were demanding immediate statehood without going through the stage of territorial government. They certainly needed settled government of some kind, for they had just found gold in the riverbeds east of Sacramento. The fabled California gold rush of 1849 brought thousands of new settlers of all nationalities to California and, with them, a need for public order as they scrambled over each other searching feverishly for riches. Their arrival brought even worse calamities to the California Indians, whose --- population had fallen from 300,000 at the time of Spanish contact to 150,000 by the middle of the nineteenth century. In the first 30 years of American occupation, disease, starvation, enslavement, white massacres, and ruthless land seizures took the lives of all but 30,000 survivors, or only about 10 percent of the original native population. Southerners brightened at the possibility of using slave labor in California gold mines, but most “forty-niners” recoiled at the idea of black competition and demanded admission as a free state. Southerners hated this prospect, for the admission of California without a balancing slave state would give the North a permanent advantage in the US Senate. With a majority in both houses of Congress, southerners feared, free-state forces could fasten the Wilmot Proviso on all the remaining territories and prevail in every subsequent sectional controversy. Someday, they might even pass a constitutional amendment to abolish slavery. Congress might have used the Missouri Compromise line of 36°30' to divide California into two states, one slave and one free. In principle, leading southerners now rejected the Missouri Compromise and denied the right of Congress to ban slavery from any part of the federal territory, but they might have accepted this compromise for the sake of peace. Instead, northern congressmen were unbending and refused to admit slavery to any part of the Mexican Cession. A confusing tangle of other issues also needed attention. As before, Texas wanted its state boundary to follow the Rio Grande all the way to the Rocky Mountains, giving it half of New Mexico and extending slavery to Santa Fe. Texas bondholders wanted assurance of repayment since its old government had disappeared. With the gag rule ended, abolitionists revived the petition question and demanded abolition of slavery and the slave trade in the District of Columbia. Congress was so divided that the House took three weeks and 59 ballots to elect a Speaker. Militant southerners angrily threatened to leave the Union before accepting free soil in the Mexican Cession. The issue of fugitive slaves roused the most divisive emotions. Slaves had always hated their enslavement and attempted to escape it. Their efforts were good examples of the way slaves themselves acted to intensify the slavery dispute and keep forcing whites to grapple with an issue they might have preferred to avoid. The US Constitution had recognized masters’ rights to recapture runaways and return them to slavery, but some southerners had used this provision as a pretext for kidnapping free blacks and enslaving them. Upsetting many northern- --- ers, some had also employed professional slave catchers to go north and reclaim their human property. As support for slavery declined, northern states struck back with personal liberty laws to outlaw kidnapping and protect fugitives with jury trials, including the right to give testimony and use attorneys. Southern leaders bitterly protested that these laws violated their constitutional rights, and in 1842, the US Supreme Court agreed with them in the case of *Prigg v. Pennsylvania*. In response, many northern states passed new personal liberty laws that forbade their courts or officials from participating in the capture or return of fugitives, forcing masters to rely on federal authorities instead. Going beyond state laws, black and white abolitionists formed the Underground Railroad, a network of sympathizers to smuggle fugitives to Canada and safety. By risking her own life and freedom by entering the South to rescue the enslaved, Harriet Tubman became the most famous of these courageous activists. Historians are unsure of the scope and effectiveness of the Underground Railroad, for propagandists on both sides had incentives to exaggerate. Supporters boasted of 50,000 escapes, for example, but the slaveholders themselves, who bitterly protested assistance to runaways, only reported about a thousand fugitives each year to US census takers. For angry and frightened owners, however, any assistance to fugitives was outrageous, and tales of the Underground Railroad assumed a symbolic importance far exceeding the number of successful escapes. Southerners bitterly protested both personal liberty laws and the Underground Railroad, steadily claiming that northerners were violating their constitutional obligations, and calling for federal remedies. ## CONTENDING RESPONSES Ducking the issue of fugitives, President Taylor offered his own solution to the territorial dispute. The South had counted Taylor as an ally, but unlike other southern politicians, Taylor the professional soldier was not afraid of the Wilmot Proviso and did not believe that the security of slavery in the South depended on expansion. Nor did he have much respect for the ground rules of the Second Party System, blundering on patronage matters and ignoring the need for party unity in his plan for the West. In his first annual message to Congress, delivered in December 1849, Taylor proposed to neutralize the controversy over the Wilmot Proviso by organizing no territorial governments in the Mexican Cession. --- California could be admitted right away with its free-state constitution and New Mexico could soon follow. If these governments banned slavery as sovereign states, he reasoned, the South could not complain that the federal government had insulted its institutions. In the rest of the cession, Mexican laws against slavery would remain in force until those areas attained statehood or the courts ruled otherwise. Northern Whigs liked Taylor’s plan because it protected free soil without the offensive language of the Wilmot Proviso. Still determined to carry slavery to at least part of the West, southerners of both parties opposed the president and angrily demanded an extension of the Missouri Compromise line of 36°30', with freedom required to its north and slavery allowed to the south. Northern Democrats were happy that Taylor would admit more free states, but they hoped to satisfy the South by requiring territorial governments with popular sovereignty. None of these factions controlled a congressional majority, and tempers mounted as the combination of crosscutting disputes wrecked all efforts to forge one. Early in 1850, Senator Henry Clay returned to his role as the “Great Compromiser” and proposed a modification of Taylor’s plan that would give territorial governments to the unorganized parts of the cession but leave their Mexican laws against slavery in place. Like the president, Clay left some room for slavery in the West, but he tried to balance the demands of each section with a complex settlement for all related disputes, including the boundary of Texas, the slave trade in the District of Columbia, Texas bonds, and fugitive slaves. Clay also tried to link his proposals in an omnibus bill, so all sides would have to support the entire package and give up something to their enemies in order to gain their own objectives. Unfortunately for Clay, few representatives could make such concessions in 1850, and Congress fought bitterly over