best land, and established themselves as a small ruling class, even wealthier than Virginia’s. Also like Virginia, Barbados and the other islands adopted elected assemblies to represent the interests of their largest planters. Both Virginia and the Caribbean sugar colonies thus found economic success by growing one crop with unfree labor on large plantations. The greatest thing they both still required was a dependable source of labor when indentured servants proved insufficient. Barbados and the other sugar islands adopted slavery about the same time they discovered sugar. Virginia followed the same path, but took a little longer. By the end of the seventeenth century, a couple of hundred sugar barons owned most of Barbados, each operating one or more plantations of about 200 acres and about the same number of African slaves. The very richest spent their lives and profits in England, and left the management of their estates (and the risk of tropical diseases) to a handful of salaried white employees. Blacks outnumbered whites by as many as ten to one, since European inhabitants were mostly limited to a handful of managers, overseers, artisans, and shopkeepers. Displaced from Barbados, white ex-servants and small farmers carried the sugar system up and down the Antilles chain. Cane spread to Jamaica after 1655, when Admiral Sir William Penn (father of Pennsylvania’s founder) plucked it from Spain. Jamaica eventually surpassed Barbados as the wealthiest English colony. France likewise --- brought sugar from the small twin islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique to its much larger colony of Saint Domingue (later known as Haiti) on the western end of Hispaniola. Throughout most of the West Indies, a captive African population replaced the native Caribs and Arawaks, and toiled under the whips of European masters and overseers to produce the bewitchingly sweet crystals craved by ever-larger numbers of international consumers. Like tobacco, the price of sugar fell as production increased. The new sweetener crossed class lines, from flavoring the confections fancied by the wealthy to flavoring more affordable treats like coffee, tea, and chocolate, and providing cheap rum and molasses for the poor. Sugar profits became a treasured source of European prosperity, and the sugar islands far outranked the colonies of mainland North America in the wealth they generated for their respective empires. # Restoration Colonies When King Charles II gained the English throne in 1660, he owed heavy debts of gratitude to the courtiers and power brokers who had restored him. His chosen rewards were lavish American land grants. Like the Calvert family’s venture in Maryland, the king’s gifts were proprietary colonies, which belonged to their developers. Proprietors normally received English title to all the land in their colonies and also governing rights, so long as they did not contradict the laws of England or the ultimate sovereignty of the king. After some fumbling with other forms of government, most proprietors ruled their provinces much like the Crown. They granted headrights to settlers and sold much larger tracts of land to developers and speculators, subject to an annual quitrent. Like the king, they normally appointed a governor and an advisory council and allowed the settlers to choose a representative assembly. Most granted religious toleration. The proprietors hoped to profit from their territories by attracting as many settlers as possible, stimulating a prosperous local economy, and collecting plentiful quitrents as immigrants streamed in. Most of the proprietary colonies made good homes for their free settlers, but their proprietors rarely earned as much as they had hoped. ## THE TWO CAROLINAS King Charles I had named Carolina after himself (“Carolus” is Latin for “Charles”) when he named Maryland in honor of his wife. In 1663, his --- son Charles II granted this vast expanse between Virginia and Spanish Florida to eight Lords Proprietors, a mixed group who included some high-ranking Stuart loyalists, some key parliamentary supporters who assisted the Restoration by adroitly switching sides, and some lesser gentry with valuable experience in America. Receiving their charter in 1663, the proprietors employed the philosopher John Locke to draw up a plan of government called the Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina. Locke proposed a feudalistic system with titled nobility ruling a population of serfs, slaves, and smaller landholders. His plans were largely unworkable because free people would not submit to feudal discipline when America offered so many alternatives. Never fully implemented and later discarded, Locke’s plans illustrated how the most elaborate plans for settlement could collapse in the face of American reality. The Carolina proprietors paid little attention to the small band of fugitive Virginians who had already slipped into the far northern corner of their new province. They pinned their hopes instead on a more southern settlement they called Charles Town (later simplified to Charleston), originally located a few miles inland and then moved to a peninsula where the Ashley and Cooper Rivers meet the sea. From its origins in 1670, Charles Town maintained close ties with Barbados and welcomed Barbadian immigrants who were seeking new homes as sugar reshaped life in their parent colony. The more prosperous West Indians brought slaves with them as a matter of course and quickly started trading with their earlier island home. The Barbadians had stripped away their forests for cane fields, leaving little wood behind to fire the sugar boilers or make casks for the finished product, and little space to grow food and livestock. Early Carolinians could easily supply these deficiencies and prospered by sending cattle, hogs, corn, and timber to the Caribbean islands. This pattern began to change when planters learned how to grow rice in the fertile wetlands of the colony’s low country, or coastal region, drawing on the knowledge of slaves who grew it in Africa. Carolinians were harvesting substantial rice crops by 1690, and the fluffy grain became their economic mainstay in the eighteenth century. “The only commodity of Consequence produced in South Carolina is rice,” one observer reported in 1761, “and they reckon it as much their staple Commodity as Sugar is to Barbados and Jamaica, or Tobacco to Virginia and Maryland.” The main exception to this rule was indigo, a blue vegetable dye from India that Eliza Lucas Pinckney, daughter of the governor of Antigua, a British sugar colony, introduced in the 1740s. --- Worked by large forces of slaves, plantations became so widespread and prosperous in coastal South Carolina that the colony contained a black majority by 1708. The northern part of Carolina developed very differently. Early North Carolinians carved out small farms along the northern shores of Albemarle Sound, not far from the original site of Sir Walter Raleigh’s settlement on Roanoke Island. Shallow rivers and a hazardous coastline barred them from easy access to Atlantic commerce and limited the growth of a Chesapeake-style tobacco economy. From the outset, the proprietors seemed to recognize that distance and circumstances required a separate local government for the northern settlement, though formal separation of North and South Carolina did not occur until 1712. Unruly and independent-minded, the North Carolinians smuggled a little tobacco into Virginia by land and to northern ports through their own shallow inlets, and did not hesitate to rough up any governor or imperial official who tried to interfere. The colony remained poor and underpopulated well into the eighteenth century. In addition to foodstuffs for the West Indies, North Carolina’s most valuable commodities were lumber and naval stores, or tar, pitch, and turpentine, which were extracted from the sap of pine trees and used to waterproof wooden ships. ### NEW NETHERLAND BECOMES NEW YORK Soon after England’s capture of New Netherland in 1664, King Charles II included the former Dutch colony in a huge proprietary grant to his brother, James Stuart, the Duke of York and the future King James II. Renamed New York, James’s province originally embraced the entire Atlantic seaboard between the Delaware and Connecticut Rivers, and territories west and north of New England. James regranted much of this territory to others and did not insist on a Connecticut River boundary, but kept the Hudson Valley for himself. New York already had as many as 10,000 people scattered among four major regions, so James did not need to recruit new settlers. Tobacco planters spilled over from Maryland and clustered along the southern banks of the Delaware River. Albany thrived on the Indian fur trade, though farms were developing nearby. Connecticut farmers raised grain and livestock on eastern Long Island, where they also prepared whale oil, while Hudson Valley farms grew wheat to export as --- flour. New York City was the commercial center for all four regions, with a population of some 1,500 residents. The majority were Dutch, but the government stoked ethnic tensions by seeming to favor English newcomers. In rural areas, James continued the Dutch practice of issuing large manorial grants to be tilled by tenants, which made landlord-tenant conflicts a recurrent feature of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century politics. Dispensing with an elected legislature, James appointed a colonial governor who chose a council to advise him and sit as a court. The governor made laws and set taxes by decree, and enforced the laws that redirected the colony’s trade from Amsterdam to London. The first proprietary governor boasted that “our newe Lawes are not contrived soe Democratically as the rest,” yet the English settlers in particular rarely stopped agitating for an assembly with the power to control taxation. ### PENNSYLVANIA, NEW JERSEY, AND DELAWARE The last mainland settlements of the Restoration era were also carved from the lands of the Duke of York. Together with New York itself, the proprietorships of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware became known as the middle colonies. They were too far north for plantation crops and lacked the exclusively Puritan mission of New England, but the middle colonies contained excellent harbors and river systems that supported two major commercial centers, Philadelphia and New York. Towns encouraged trade and economic development, while the countryside attracted settlers from a wide variety of ethnic and religious backgrounds. Diversity often bred distrust of rival communities and interests, and public life in the middle colonies often featured factional quarrels and political contentiousness. As colonists learned to negotiate their differences, however, diversity could also encourage respect for personal liberty, individual exertion, tolerance of differences, and a drive for personal advancement, characteristics that became boasted aspects of American culture in later centuries. When he received New Netherland, the duke split off the land between the Hudson and the Delaware Rivers as a proprietary grant to two friends, Lord John Berkeley and Sir George Carteret. They named their province New Jersey after Carteret’s birthplace and divided it between them. Carteret took the northeastern half, or East Jersey, and attracted many settlers from Long Island and Puritan New England. Berkeley sold his half, or West Jersey, to a group of investors seeking --- refuge for the Quakers, or Religious Society of Friends. Repeated sales of the proprietorships brought political uncertainty and bitter disputes over land titles, which prompted the Crown to reunite New Jersey and govern it as a royal colony after 1702. Quakers, formally known as the Religious Society of Friends, had emerged from the welter of dissenters that blossomed in the era of England’s Civil War and Interregnum, and attracted followers who rejected the Puritans’ efforts to establish religion by worldly power. They avoided Calvinist-style arguments about the nature of salvation and abandoned external rituals like sacraments, formal preaching, and structured prayers, in favor of quiet meditation to find guidance from the divine spark, or “inner light,” that Quakers saw in every human being. Renouncing violence and the trappings of worldly status, Friends enraged English officials by refusing to bear arms, to take oaths, and to bow, curtsey, or doff their hats to social superiors, and by using the familiar pronouns “thee” and “thou” for everyone, regardless of rank. To the committed Puritans who still reigned in Massachusetts, Quakerism recalled the chaotic heresies of Anne Hutchinson and the Antinomians, who had also disrupted public order by claiming to hear God’s voice directly. Unlike most of the splinter sects of the Commonwealth period, the Quakers did not disappear in the Restoration, but continued to win converts and experience persecution. English officials jailed as many as 15,000 Quakers, and their missionaries faced whippings, exile, and even the death penalty in Massachusetts. Most Friends were men and women from modest backgrounds, but some were prominent merchants, intellectuals, and members of the gentry, including one popular and persuasive young gentleman named William Penn. Penn’s father had commanded the fleet that captured Jamaica for Oliver Cromwell’s Commonwealth, but he befriended the Stuarts when Cromwell died, loaned money to Charles II, and remained influential in his court. The younger Penn held on to his father’s wealth and access to power even after he joined the despised Quaker movement, and he helped the Friends who sought a religious haven in West Jersey. Disillusioned by their disputes over politics and ownership, Penn decided to seek his own colony in the promising territory lying west of the Delaware River. Though William Penn had been jailed four times for his Quaker faith, he maintained an unlikely friendship with the Duke of York. After breaking with the Church of England, the two shared a common --- interest in religious freedom, though James had taken the more inflammatory step of embracing Catholicism. King Charles sympathized with James’s religious leanings, so the royal brothers were receptive when Penn asked to found a new colony based on freedom of conscience for all. In the spring of 1681, the king awarded Penn a proprietary charter for Pennsylvania, or “Penn’s Woods,” a huge tract of land lying west of the Delaware River between New York and Maryland, and explained to suspicious Anglicans that the grant would simply repay his large debt to the Penn estate. Penn saw his grant as a blessed opportunity, not only to shelter persecuted Quakers and demonstrate the benefits of religious freedom, but to establish the ideal Christian society. “I eyed the Lord in the obtaining of it,” he explained, and “desire that I may not be unworthy of his love, but do that which may answer his kind providence and serve his truth and people.” Like the Puritans before him, Penn wanted Pennsylvania to be “an example . . . set up to the nations,” and earnestly prayed that “there may be room there . . . for such a godly experiment.” At the same time, he expected his province to turn a profit, explaining that “I desire to extend religious freedom, yet I want some recompense for my trouble.” To raise capital for an initial settlement, Penn sold large land grants to wealthy Friends and devised the first of several “Frames of Government” to protect landowners while extending liberty of conscience to all settlers. His plans won enthusiastic support from English and Continental Friends, and 23 ships brought supplies and 2,000 passengers to Pennsylvania in 1681. Penn himself and 2,000 more settlers arrived the following year. Taking the post of governor, Penn led his colonists in forging friendly relations with the Lenni Lenape, or Delaware Indians, establishing a record of honesty and fairness that remained firm until after his death. Penn went back to England after a two-year stay in Pennsylvania, and only spent another two years there in 1699–1701, but his influence on the colony and its capital of Philadelphia remained strong. The bulk of early settlers in Pennsylvania were English, Irish, and Welsh Quakers. Many were attracted by the commercial possibilities of Philadelphia, but some of the early merchants were closely connected to Penn and shared his confidence, while others felt more isolated from the center of power. Other differences arose from the fact that Quaker settlers dominated the three counties around Philadelphia, while inhabitants of the three Lower Counties near the mouth of --- the Delaware were very similar to their neighbors in nearby Maryland and tended to favor the claims of its proprietor, Lord Baltimore. These differences bred an early pattern of political dissension, with proprietary and anti-proprietary parties taking shape among the Quakers, and the Lower Counties agitating for their own particular interests. Fervent opposition prevented Penn from collecting most quitrents, while the Lower Counties gained their own legislative assembly and eventually became the separate colony of Delaware. Step by step, Penn retreated in the face of demands for more powerful and more representative legislative institutions, though the constant clamor for new laws and more legal protections distressed him. “For the love of God, me, and the poor country,” he wailed at one point, “be not so *governmentish*, so noisy and open in your dissatisfactions!” The fractious colonists of Pennsylvania were reluctant to obey, however, and continued a lively sparring contest with Penn and his successors for the remainder of the colony’s existence. ### CHARITY AND GEORGIA Georgia, the southernmost colony to join the American Revolution, did not take shape until the 1730s, long after the establishment of the other twelve. Led by James Oglethorpe, a group of English humanitarians known as the Trustees of Georgia obtained a charter in 1732 to found a refuge for debtors, petty criminals, and other poor persons, as well as persecuted foreign Protestants, on lands to the south of the Savannah River that were included in the original grant to Carolina. Calling the settlement Georgia in honor of King George II, they gave free transportation, supplies, and land to hard-pressed artisans, laborers, and their families, but rejected actual debtors and convicts. The trustees banned slavery to preserve Georgia as a society of small farmers supporting themselves by their own labor, but the settlers themselves were unhappy with this policy, and cast envious eyes on the prosperity of South Carolina’s nearby rice plantations. After years of complaints and economic stagnation, the trustees abandoned their utopian plans, lifted the ban on slaves, and surrendered the colony to royal government in 1752. For most of the eighteenth century, colonial Georgia remained a fringe settlement along the Savannah River, smaller and weaker and exposed to attack from Spaniards and Indians, but otherwise very similar to the neighboring colony of South Carolina. --- # The Operations of Empire The growth and social development of the English colonies in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries took place within a larger framework of Atlantic commerce and empire. By the middle of the 1680s, all the colonies (except Georgia) that later formed the core of the United States had taken shape on the Atlantic seaboard. Other colonies flanked them, including Spanish Florida, the sugar islands, and the fur-trading empire of New France. Political and economic structures varied widely, but kings, ministers, and lawmakers governed all these empires to enrich their own countries through trade. ### MERCANTILISM AND TRADE Following the thought of Adam Smith, a Scottish author whose pathbreaking book, *The Wealth of Nations*, appeared in 1776, modern economists usually argue that profits and growth are greatest when businesses are free to buy and sell as they choose. During Smith’s lifetime, however, most imperial administrators believed no such thing. For them, colonial trade was much too precious to be left to chance or the unreliable choices of individuals, so the colonizing countries all enacted strict rules to govern what their colonists could sell to whom, and from whom they could buy. Imperial regulation took shape within a body of intellectual assumptions that later analysts called mercantilism, because it favored the merchants who conducted imperial trade. Every leading nation of Europe tried to sell more to its neighbors than it purchased, hoping that the difference between the value of its exports and imports would remain in the kingdom as specie, or gold and silver coin. By definition, not every country could succeed in creating a favorable balance of trade, for no country could acquire a surplus unless one or more of its partners ran a deficit. Mercantilists thus saw trade as a zero-sum game in which one country’s gains always spelled losses for another. Nevertheless, monarchs hoped to use trade to accumulate a hoard of cash that they could tap to maintain their armies, their courts, and their kingdoms’ larger interests. As part of this strategy, each empire sought to prevent the escape of specie to its neighbors by using its colonies to supply commodities and purchase finished goods. English mercantilists also tried to encourage overseas commerce by granting certain corporations monopoly privileges in certain areas of business, --- like the East India Company in South Asia, Hudson’s Bay Company in northern Canada, or the Royal African Company in the slave trade. The broad outlines of English mercantile policy appeared in a series of basic laws called the Navigation Acts, successively adopted by Parliament between 1650 and 1698. Pinpointing their imperial purposes, one observer called the Navigation Acts “a true way to enlarge dominions throughout the world, the most easy for conquests, and the least costly for appropriating the property of others.” The acts were complicated and often amended, but their basic intent was to create a closed trading universe among the colonies and the mother country. A set of enumerated goods that included sugar, tobacco, indigo, and other valuable commodities could only be shipped in English or colonial vessels, manned by English or colonial crews, and sent to English or colonial ports. Once in England, these goods could be unloaded, taxed, and then reloaded and sold to another country, but colonists could not sell enumerated goods directly to foreign buyers, nor could they purchase goods abroad without paying English taxes. American products such as flour and fish, which England could supply for itself, could be sold anywhere, usually in the West Indies. The duties imposed by the Navigation Acts were quite valuable to the Crown, and produced as much as £140,000 per year as early as 1670. England enforced the Navigation Acts by a combination of prohibitions and taxes designed to make certain forms of commerce too expensive to pursue. Regulatory taxes were supposedly collected in the colonies, but unlike more lucrative levies, they normally yielded little or no revenue, either because they made a given trade too costly or channeled it to smugglers who paid no taxes at all. Special