wrote South Carolinian Mary Legg to a friend, "that it is not strange when we see the body sometimes give way when so much rests upon the mind." As the war ground on and misery intensified, some women despaired and urged their husbands to desert. "I would not have you do anything wrong for the world," one North Carolina woman wrote her husband near the end of the war, "but before God, Edward, unless you come home we must die." Combined with even worse conditions in the army, such letters fueled an escalating Confederate desertion rate, especially in the final months of combat. Slaves reacted guardedly to the war’s outbreak, leading many white diarists to wonder quietly what they might be thinking. As Union armies approached, of course, many seized the chance for escape. Others lingered but their owners complained of growing defiance. "The negroes are worse than free," Alabama’s Susanna Clay informed her son. "We cannot exert any authority. I beg ours to do what little is done. . . . Alfred told me this morning that if your father . . . let the overseer attempt to punish [slaves] for disobedience that some one would kill the overseer!" While threats of violence frightened whites, they were fortunate that most slaves who could fight for freedom chose military enlistment over acts of private vengeance. In later years, planter families fondly remembered their faithful retainers, but increased resistance seemed more evident to contemporaries. --- # CONFEDERATE DISSENT Shortages, conscription, and the fear of defeat inevitably affected Confederate government and stirred conflicting protests against the "tyranny" and ineffectiveness of the Richmond government. Disaffection and outright disloyalty ran highest in the South’s interior uplands, where unionism had always been strong, invaders were absent, and the government pressed heavily for men and provisions. Prewar slaveholders had won yeoman support by honoring their freedom and independence. Once the war began, however, the Confederacy interfered with private life far more than the US government had ever done, by forcing men into its armies, extracting high taxes, issuing worthless currency, dictating economic decisions, seizing civilian property, and failing to fend off invasion. West Virginia was the only disaffected region to leave the Confederacy outright, but dissidents in western North Carolina and eastern Tennessee defied conscription, sheltered deserters, and even joined the Union Army, leading to serious guerilla warfare in many counties where whites were poor and slavery rare. The governors of disaffected states struggled hard to sustain popular morale by sheltering their constituents from Richmond’s heaviest demands. “Now Govr.,” Private O. Goddin demanded of North Carolina’s Zebulon Vance in February 1863, “do tell me how we poor soldiers who are fighting for the ‘rich mans negro’ can support our families at $11 per month? How can the poor live? ... I am fearful we will have a revolution unless something is done as the majority of our soldiers are poor men with families who say they are tired of the rich mans war & poor mans fight.” Joined by Governor Joseph Brown of Georgia, Vance became especially famous for defying the central government, hindering conscription, resisting appointees from other states, retaining state troops for home defense, and endlessly feuding with tax collectors and army officers. While resisting Richmond, however, state officials organized draft-exempt men in aggressive Home Guard units to suppress more-dangerous disloyalty. The Confederacy also fought dissenters by suspending habeas corpus, using the army and Home Guard to enforce the draft and arrest deserters, and resorting to martial law. Like Lincoln, Davis drew charges of dictatorship, but he had no political party to support him and no personal warmth to disarm his critics. His own vice president, Alexander H. Stephens of Georgia, accused Davis of “aiming at absolute power” and denounced the suspension of habeas corpus as a “blow at --- the very "vitals of liberty." Devotion to states’ rights remained so widespread that one beleaguered official suggested that a tombstone for the Confederacy might read, "Died of a Theory." Like their counterparts in the border states, some southern dissidents moved beyond disagreement to assist the enemy through espionage, sabotage, interference with military recruitment, and theft or destruction of supplies. North Carolina unionists organized a secret society known as the Heroes of America, or Red Strings, to collaborate actively with the Union, encourage desertion, and spirit recruits to the Union Army. In time, draft resisters, armed deserters, and pro-Union guerillas made parts of the state too dangerous for Confederate forces to enter. Punishment or retaliation for these activities easily led to violence against civilians by regular army units, poorly trained and undisciplined Home Guards, or other civilians. Sent to combat disloyal activity in North Carolina, for example, one Confederate colonel explained how he gained information from one guerilla’s wife: "I slapped her jaws till she put down her baby & and went with [my men]," he reported later. "They tied her thumbs behind her back & suspended her with a cord tied to her two thumbs thus fastened behind her to a limb so that her toes could just touch the ground. . . . After . . . a while she said . . . she would tell all she knew." Wherever it occurred, guerilla violence and its suppression brought wartime trauma and suffering to civilians who never experienced a formal battle, leaving deep resentment in its wake. ### UNION-HELD DIXIE Month after month as the war continued, Union armies stretched deeper and deeper into the Confederacy. The federal government never lost control of Fortress Monroe at the mouth of the Chesapeake and immediately protected itself by occupying Alexandria, Virginia, and adjacent territory near Washington, DC. New Orleans fell in 1862, and early naval assaults created small Union toeholds on the coasts of Florida and the Carolinas. Grant’s capture of the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers brought in most of Tennessee, and Union possession of the Mississippi brought control of its shoreline communities. Over time, more and more of the South became occupied Union territory. Prewar fears led white southerners to expect John Brown–style treatment from their captors. One northern Virginian predicted "fanat- --- ics and lawless ruffians ready for every outrage and violence,” while another feared for “the lives and liberties of our people generally, and the horror of our women.” Led by slaveholders, large numbers of whites fled the northern approach and brought with them as many slaves and valuables as possible. Adrift in the Confederate interior, these refugees sought shelter with family and friends when they could and seriously strained local resources throughout the war. Other whites remained in place, some to guard their property, some with Union sympathies, and others with no resources for flight and no place to go. Contrary to predictions, the first waves of occupiers tried to treat civilians gently, still convinced that the majority were loyal at heart, deluded by a secessionist minority, and ready to re-embrace the Union if treated fairly. “I am laboring industriously to undeceive the people,” one optimistic officer wrote from Arkansas. “A few weeks work here will make this region safe for the Union forever.” Conciliatory policies soon gave way to sterner treatment, as the occupiers discovered that support for secession and hatred of the invaders reached far beyond the plantation elite. Whites in the occupied territories refused to take loyalty oaths, spat upon soldiers, and publicly prayed for Confederate victory. If anything, women’s hostility seemed more virulent than men’s, as “ladies” used their privileges of rank and gender to escape its consequences. In New Orleans, General Benjamin Butler attacked those privileges directly by ordering that any woman who insulted his troops would be “treated as a woman of the town, plying her profession,” or in other words, as a prostitute. No matter how provoking, women’s insults were less dangerous than violence by male assailants. Just as opposition guerillas attacked behind the lines of the Confederacy, secessionist irregulars harassed Union occupiers by assaulting patrols, destroying bridges and railroads, looting supplies, and murdering Union sympathizers. In some areas, unionist poor whites did the same to secessionist planters. In Arkansas, where one officer had predicted easy conciliation, another soon reported that “the countryside seems to have degenerated into bushwhackers. . . . It is hardly safe to go out of our lines a mile.” Commanders responded with a “hard policy” of harsh retaliation, seizing or destroying supplies from local farms, burning barns and houses of suspected opponents, and executing captured guerillas. In wide swaths of both Union- and Confederate-occupied territory, irregular forces hunted each other relentlessly, all civilians were suspects, and no one could be trusted. --- Civilians suffered from temporary enemy incursions as well as long-term occupations. In the spring of 1864, for example, Ulysses Grant sent troops to occupy Virginia’s Shenandoah Valley, a major source of Confederate provisions and a proven invasion route to the North. Fighting raged up and down the valley all summer until General Philip H. Sheridan took command of Union forces in August and forced Confederate defenders high into the nearby Blue Ridge Mountains. Sheridan then turned to his real assignment, which was to make “the Shenandoah Valley [into] a barren waste . . . so that crows flying over it for the balance of this season will have to carry their [food] with them.” In an episode still remembered locally as “the Burning,” Union troops swarmed across the fertile valley until they had burned over 2,000 barns filled with crops and farm tools, destroyed over 70 flour mills, and killed or seized over 7,000 farm animals, without distinguishing between the property of northern or southern sympathizers. Confederate guerillas fought back fiercely but unsuccessfully, and Sheridan climaxed the campaign with a decisive victory that smashed the army of his Confederate opponent, General Jubal Early. If white southerners met Union occupiers as bitter enemies, blacks welcomed them as heroes and liberators. Even before the troops’ arrival, whites complained that slaves were becoming “insolent” and “insubordinate,” refusing to work or deserting their plantations to serve the Union. Before the Emancipation Proclamation, slavery did not legally end when the federal army took over an area, but many commanders refused to enforce the laws of bondage. After the proclamation, the army’s advance destroyed legal slavery, but former masters struggled to continue it. In many occupied towns and cities, newly freed African Americans celebrated with speeches, parades, and special church services. According to one observer, Nashville’s “procession was composed of both sexes and all ages, on foot and riding in carriages . . . and vehicles of all kinds. Two fine brass bands were with them.” The marchers hailed freedom as “the year of jubilee.” As the cheers gradually fell silent, the problem remained of what to do next. In areas of early Union control, commanders organized “freedmen’s colonies” where fleeing ex-slaves could find emergency rations, simple housing, schools, medical care, and army recruiters. One of the most famous of these experiments in freedom began in 1862 at Port Royal in South Carolina’s Sea Islands, where 10,000 blacks had stayed on their rice and cotton plantations when their masters fled from Union occupation the previous year. Northern reformers and --- missionaries quickly flocked in to establish schools and churches and aid the newly freed in building new lives. Contrary to predictions by slavery’s defenders, the liberated slaves did not become idlers, but divided their time between continued plantation work and cultivating individual plots the army assigned them. By January 1865, General William Tecumseh Sherman had occupied the same region and seized some 400,000 coastal acres for the use of former slaves, promising 40 acres to each family and help in finding them a work animal. Sherman’s Field Order No. 15 applied temporarily in only one place, but it opened the question of what economic aid the government could offer the newly freed. It also led to a widespread misunderstanding that the government had promised all freed families “forty acres and a mule.” Fully conscious that their unpaid labor had enriched the South and the nation, freed people eagerly embraced this notion as simple justice. Most commanders preferred to see blacks return to the plantation as wage workers. In South Carolina, Louisiana, and elsewhere, they invited northern businessmen—most of whom knew nothing of cotton planting—to rent “abandoned” plantations and employ the former slaves to till them. Reliable planters who did not flee could do the same. When blacks protested these arrangements, unsympathetic officers compelled them to submit to low wages and harsh discipline that closely resembled bondage. Though some blacks managed to gain their own land in the aftermath of war, most learned bitterly that this result would be much less common than more plantation labor. “This Mighty Scourge of War” Lincoln removed General McClellan in the fall of 1862 but his immediate successors were no more successful. Nevertheless, the Confederacy’s failure at the Battle of Gettysburg and its simultaneous loss of Vicksburg, Mississippi, brought a turning point in its military fortunes. When Ulysses S. Grant took command of the Union forces, he inflicted a series of increasingly bloody defeats that eventually led to a siege of Richmond. Facing defeat, Confederate leaders desperately considered arming and freeing slave soldiers, but could not fight off Grant or avoid surrender in the spring of 1865. By that point, Lincoln had rejected his former support for black colonization and openly called for including freed African Americans in the nation’s political community. Murder blocked his leadership of that momentous task. --- > **FIGURE 10.** Massive casualties in the Civil War shocked Americans on both sides who expected a short, painless conflict. > Civil War Collection, Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, LC-DIG-cwpb-01099. # "GRANT IS MY MAN" Lincoln replaced McClellan, who would not attack, with a series of generals who attacked but could not win. Famed for his magnificent side-whiskers (better known as "sideburns"), General Ambrose Burnside sent his troops across the Rappahannock River near Fredericksburg, Virginia, on December 13, 1862, and up the opposing hilltop. Lee’s artillery and infantry easily cut them to pieces from their entrenched positions, leading the Confederate commander to remark grimly, “It is good that war is so terrible, or we should grow too fond of it.” The Battle of Fredericksburg took 13,000 casualties from a Union army of 114,000, while the Confederacy lost no more than 5,000 out of 72,000. --- General Joseph Hooker replaced Burnside and recrossed the Rappahannock in the spring of 1863. "May God have mercy on General Lee," he boasted, "for I will have none." Audaciously, Lee divided his outnumbered men and sent Stonewall Jackson to attack Hooker's rear in the Battle of Chancellorsville (May 2–6, 1863). In twilight at the end of the first day's fighting, Jackson received an accidental wound from his own men that later took his life, but Lee's daring tactic disorganized his opponents and successfully repelled them. Triumphant after these victories, the South would later suffer from a giddy conviction of Lee's invincibility. Even without Jackson, Lee flaunted his confidence by repeating the tactic that had failed the previous year at Antietam. Passing over the Potomac, his 75,000 rebels romped into Maryland and Pennsylvania, feasted on plentiful provisions, and scooped up all the clothes, shoes, tents, blankets, and work animals they could find. They also captured black civilians whom they took to be runaways and sent them back to slavery. Without cavalry for reconnaissance, units from the two armies unwittingly collided outside the little town of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. As General George Meade, the new federal commander, hastened north from Washington, the two armies began the greatest battle of the Civil War on July 1, 1863. After a day of charges and countercharges through the town and its fields, the Union Army retired to the summit of Cemetery Ridge, a U-shaped string of hills on the south side of town. A second day of very fierce fighting did not dislodge the defenders but saw legendary incidents in military history, including a controversial delay by Confederate General James Longstreet that later critics blamed for the South's defeat, and a heroic defense of Little Round Top, a key hill, by Colonel Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain and the 20th Maine Volunteers. On the climactic third day, Lee tried to weaken Meade's hilltop position with a massive but ineffective artillery barrage. When the cannons fell silent about three o'clock that afternoon, the troops of General George Pickett advanced across the low valley separating the two armies and into a deadly curtain of lead. A few attackers reached the summit but nearly half died in Pickett's Charge. The next day, Lee's dispirited warriors turned back to Virginia in a driving rain, having lost their last chance to destroy the main body of the Union Army and menace Washington. A different outcome would certainly have strengthened the war's northern opponents and heightened the impact of the New York draft riots, which broke out a week later. Instead, the so- --- called high-water mark of the Confederacy had passed and the war had reached its turning point. Between the two armies, 60,000 were missing, killed, or wounded. Jubilant northerners soon learned of another victory. Earlier that spring, the army of General Ulysses S. Grant and the gunboats of Admiral David Dixon Porter had trapped a large rebel force in Vicksburg, the last Confederate stronghold on the Mississippi River. After a bitter siege reduced its inhabitants to eating rats and living in caves, the city fell on July 3 and gave the Union control of the South’s river highway. “Grant is my man,” Lincoln exulted, “and will be mine for the rest of the war.” That October, Lincoln gave Grant command of the Army of the Potomac, and raised him to general-in-chief the following March. In November of 1863, Lincoln traveled to the recent battlefield at Gettysburg to dedicate a national cemetery for the Union soldiers who had fallen there. Massachusetts Senator Edward Everett was the featured speaker, but the president also had a moment, which he used for a short but overwhelming statement of the war’s enduring meaning. He began by invoking the Declaration of Independence, the republic’s founding scripture: “Four score and seven years ago, our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.” Previous generations of Americans had usually cited the Constitution as embodying their principles, but Lincoln implicitly saw the original Constitution as a bundle of flawed compromises—including its acknowledgements of slavery—that did not match the Declaration’s loftier promise of equality. For him, the war’s great purpose was to prove that the “proposition” of equality was strong enough to hold the United States together and preserve the possibility of republican government for future generations. As he put it, the war was “testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure.” Since the men who had died at the battlefield had already sanctified it, Lincoln humbly denied that he could say anything to magnify their achievement. Instead, he asked his audience to complete “the great task remaining before us,” and honor the fallen by defeating disunion, slavery, and inequality, republicanism’s worst enemies. Victory would bring “a new birth of freedom,” he concluded, and ensure “that government of the people, by the people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth.” In a few cadenced phrases, Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address had put the ideals of the Declaration of --- Independence at the center of the war’s purpose and projected them into the future as crucial expressions of the mission that Americans claimed for themselves. ### THE TIDE SLOWLY TURNS As the Union triumphed at Vicksburg and Gettysburg, it also pierced the Confederate heartland. Federal forces had repelled a great Confederate invasion of Kentucky in 1862 and kept shoving the rebels southward in the year that followed. Pushed into northwest Georgia, the Confederates turned and dealt the Union a smashing defeat at the Battle of Chickamauga on September 19–20, 1863, only to resume their retreat later that year. By July 1864, General William Tecumseh Sherman had trapped the Confederate Army of Tennessee in the city of Atlanta. Grant reached the outskirts of Richmond that summer. The season’s fighting had begun in May, when Lee struck again near Chancellorsville but fumbled in a scrubby tangle known as the Wilderness. Unlike his predecessors, Grant followed up by skirting Lee’s right flank, attacking at Spotsylvania Courthouse (May 8–12, 1864) and again at the hamlet of Cold Harbor (June 1, 1864). Union losses in these gruesomely bloody battles exceeded 50,000 men, but Grant would not bend. “I intend to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer,” he declared, not realizing that final victory would take ten months longer than that. Well aware of the odds against them, northern troops fought furiously but fatalistically, even pinning name tags on the backs of their uniforms the night before the Battle of Cold Harbor because they expected their faces to be blown off the next morning. The Confederates lost “only” half as