cut costs. The work day shortened from fourteen hours to twelve, six days a week, but the mills slashed wages, doubled the number of machines per worker, and crushed the ensuing strike. When the company restored men’s wages but not women’s, Bagley led the Lowell Female Labor Reform Association in demanding legislation for a ten-hour day. With Bagley as president, the LFLRA bombarded the Massachu --- setts legislature with petitions signed by thousands. The “mill girls” could not vote or even speak in public without scandal, but they seized on republican political principles to condemn the mills’ “system of tedious and protracted toil” as violating “the great principles of justice, equality and republicanism . . . so essential to the moral, mental and physical well-being of society, and the existence of a free and virtuous people.” When lawmakers would not act, Sarah Bagley kept agitating for labor reform, prison reform, the abolition of slavery, and the end of capital punishment until she finally left the mills in 1848. Lucy Larcom and Sarah Bagley lived at the intersection of converging changes in America’s society and economy. Their workplaces were technological marvels that belonged to corporations, an increasingly powerful business structure. They spun slave-grown cotton that came to Lowell on newly constructed canals, steamboats, and railroads. The same carriers took their cloth to consumers, including the slaves who had grown its fiber. New forms of communication, including cheaply printed newspapers and handbills, had lured a woman from Ireland to work in Mrs. Larcom’s boardinghouse. Millions of other immigrants made similar journeys. And finally, the mill owners reinvested their profits in a continual process of capitalist development that made America a world industrial power by 1860. Historians have given the name “Market Revolution” to the interlocking sets of changes that introduced Americans to the “buzzing and hissing and whizzing” of early industrialization. Americans had always bought and sold in far-flung markets, for transatlantic trade had supported the colonies from the start, but geographical barriers had hampered commercial expansion. Historians have also identified the “Transportation Revolution” and the “Communication Revolution,” for improvements in these areas greatly expanded the scope and scale of market activities. They also speak of the “Industrial Revolution,” for machinery transformed both manufacturing and the nature and meaning of work. All these terms are useful for specific developments, but “Market Revolution” seeks to embrace them all by emphasizing the role of expanding markets in driving change throughout the society and the economy. These “revolutions” had far-reaching consequences. When cheap, abundant goods arrived from far away and undersold local products, Americans had to put aside what others could do cheaper, concentrate on making and selling what they did best, and buy their other necessities from those distant, unseen rivals. These were the market --- forces that sent slaves to Mississippi, cotton and “mill girls” to Lowell, machine-made textiles to every neighborhood, and homespun cloth to oblivion. As the new methods spread, buying and selling intensified, and the importance of markets, prices, cash, and credit rose dramatically. The consequences included western expansion, urban and rural transformation, a new class structure, new shapes and meanings for homes and workplaces, and dramatically new roles for women. The changes of this period are also called the expansion of capitalism, or the economic system based on private ownership of capital (the money and equipment needed to make things) and on free markets for products, labor, land, and capital itself. In a capitalist economy, business owners, or capitalists, employ workers and compete for profits, often by replacing older methods with more efficient newer ones, a process economists call creative destruction. As capitalism continued to grow and spread, American public discourse would often revolve around its complex burdens and rewards. Because the years 1815 to 1860 immediately preceded the Civil War, historians also call these years the antebellum, or prewar, period. The label can be distorting, for the era was important in itself and not just for what followed. The term is convenient and often appropriate, however, for the sectional conflict became more and more serious in these decades, inflamed in many cases by economic change. The Market Revolution affected the free and slave states differently. This chapter focuses on the impact of economic change on northern society between the end of the War of 1812 and 1860. Chapter 9 treats social reform and cultural change in the North, and chapter 10 examines the South. ## Technology and the New Economy Household production still dominated the American economy at the end of the eighteenth century. Joined by a servant or two and sometimes a slave, farm families combined limited self-sufficiency with the sale of surplus crops. Most townspeople lived on the same scale, in homes that were also workshops, where the master ruled his family and a handful of journeymen and apprentices. The household economy could be stifling or supportive to its members, but it rested on face-to-face relationships and an intimate scale of life. A number of factors eroded the household economy, especially after 1815. A growing population strained existing resources. Ambi- --- tious leaders applied lessons from the War of 1812 to domestic economic problems. New technology stimulated competition over long distances, breaking barriers between communities that had fostered both isolation and independence. Americans responded by dramatically increasing the pace of economic change. ## THE HOUSEHOLD ECONOMY Household independence was the most important product of the small farm in the early nineteenth century. The male head enjoyed the most liberty, but an adequate farm also freed his wife and children from the poverty and servility of tenant farming or wage labor. Seeking a competency, or enough land and tools to keep them decently fed, clothed, and sheltered, families also wanted to leave their children enough property — land for the boys, cash or household goods for the girls — to allow them to establish their own independent households when they married. Though women lacked independence almost everywhere, most Americans shared Thomas Jefferson’s view of yeoman farming as a free man’s ideal life and the essential social foundation for a republic, because it freed men from “the casualties and caprice of customers” and allowed them to avoid the “subservience and venality” that ruined good citizens. With care, most rural families could reach this limited goal, but only a few surpassed it. In many parts of the countryside, many families still grew most of their food, made many things themselves, and limited their outside purchases. Farm women could make work clothing, for example, first raising cotton, wool, or flax, then spinning and weaving it, and finally sewing it into garments. Those who could not afford a loom or spinning wheel bartered for homespun with neighbors and bought imported fabrics for special occasions. Women also produced butter and cheese for sale in nearby towns, and their men did the same with corn whiskey, lumber, or wood ashes to make soap and glass. Americans called these products home manufactures, meaning things that were made by hand, not grown from the earth. When they needed extra help or something they could not make, farm families pooled labor or swapped tasks with neighbors, keeping intricate accounts with each other and often allowing months to pass between repaying the loan of an ox, for example, with a load of firewood. Similar barter arrangements with rural craftsmen and storekeepers limited outside trade, so New Englanders sold no more than --- 25 percent of what they grew outside the region. Some gained enough wealth to stand above their neighbors, but in contrast to plantation districts, northern rural inequality mostly varied with men’s ages, as farmers accumulated property over time and then passed it to their children. In this environment, costly innovations promised great risks and few rewards. Borrowing money for more land or better equipment might swell the harvest, but a shortage of harvesters could ruin it and rural isolation would limit sales. The credit crisis that sparked the Massachusetts Regulators (or Shays’s Rebellion) was still a fresh memory, moreover, and warned farmers against economic risks that endangered their land and liberty. Avoiding dangerous innovations, safety-first farmers clung to tradition, though outsiders bewailed their “backwardness.” Urban households resembled their country cousins. Even the largest import-export firms were family businesses held together by networks of brothers, uncles, and nephews. Smaller businessmen often lived with their clerks above their shops or offices. Americans still imported luxuries from Europe and China, but towns and cities also supported skilled artisans who produced everything from fine furniture and silver tea sets to candles, wagons, barrels, clothing, and shoes. Artisans treasured the hard-won skills that turned raw materials into finished products. Like other small businessmen, the typical master lived over his shop, with live-in apprentices who began to learn his trade as early as age 12 or 14. Gaining freedom at age 21, the male apprentice became a journeyman who worked for wages until he could start his own shop and gain the urban equivalent of the farmer’s precious independence. Working women sometimes entered this world through trades such as dressmaking or millinery (hat-making), though self-supporting women more commonly toiled in low-paying positions as seamstresses, washerwomen, or domestics. Like safety-first farming, the master mechanic’s workshop fostered a sense of masculine independence that reinforced the promise of republican liberty. In Philadelphia, New York, and other major cities, craft associations assisted masters and journeymen in sickness and hard times, and gave them political leverage as they marched together in grand parades, to demand adoption of the federal Constitution, for example, or to celebrate victory in the War of 1812. Artisans championed republican equality and stressed the combined importance of workers and their tools with their motto “By hammer and hand, all arts do stand.” They --- played key political roles in organizations like the Sons of Liberty and the Democratic-Republican Societies, and they continued their civic activities as the nineteenth century opened. Below the ranks of skilled craftsmen, were the carters, draymen, and laborers who kept urban commerce moving by land, as throngs of sailors did by sea. Poor black and white women could join the workforce as domestic servants. Possibly disenfranchised by laws that limited voting to property holders, the poorest white workers enjoyed the privileges of race without full republican equality. They suffered galling poverty in the best of times, and serious want when business slackened, competing with penniless widows and disabled veterans for meager public assistance. Northern cities still held a scattering of slaves but gradual emancipation had freed the rising generation. Criminals, beggars, and prostitutes filled the lowest ranks of urban society. Despite its resistance to change, the household economy faced rising pressures, beginning with population growth. The United States held about 8.4 million people in 1815, and their numbers doubled almost every 25 years. The Louisiana Purchase had more than doubled the country’s land area, but 85 out of every 100 Americans still lived east of the Appalachians, and the ratio of people to land was growing tight for the existing technology. In every generation, northeastern farms grew smaller as fathers divided their lands among heirs, and the urban economy could not easily absorb many rural migrants. Struggling to make ends meet and worried for their children’s future, farm families sought new strategies for preserving independence, gaining a competency, and providing for the next generation. New transportation technology would offer them a possible solution. ### THE TRANSPORTATION REVOLUTION Spurred by population growth and the pressures on households, entrepreneurs in every field tried sell their products cheaper, faster, and farther away. They especially tried to expand the size and scope of their markets with big transportation and communication projects that Americans called internal improvements. The earliest were turnpikes, or privately financed toll roads, that tied cities to the countryside with well-drained gravel surfaces that could bear heavy traffic in bad weather. In 1794, the Lancaster Turnpike linked Philadelphia to its hinterland, and a thin network of similar roads quickly spread out --- across eastern Pennsylvania, southern New York, and southern New England. Traveling by water was even easier than traveling by turnpikes, so British experiments in canal building drew widespread attention. In 1816, a Senate committee complained that “a coal mine may exist in the United States not more than ten miles from valuable ores of iron and other materials, and both of them be useless until a canal is established between them, as the price of land carriage is too great to be borne by either.” Early canals were very short, but in 1817, New York undertook an artificial waterway running 364 miles from Lake Erie to the Hudson River at Albany. Under the leadership of Governor DeWitt Clinton, the Erie Canal became the engineering marvel of the age, using a complex series of locks to regulate its flow of water and an extensive series of bridges and aqueducts to traverse valleys and streams. Even before its completion in 1825, tolls on the finished portion of the Erie Canal were paying for construction of the rest, as upstate farmers raised more wheat and millers floated cheap flour to New York City. The completed canal linked the Great Lakes basin with Atlantic markets and brought commercial farming to the Ohio country, where the English, French, and Indians had fought only two generations before. Success spawned dozens of imitators, and a wave of canal construction spread across Pennsylvania and the Ohio Valley. More innovations came from steam. By heating water in sealed boilers, eighteenth-century inventors had used steam to drive the pistons of pumps and factory equipment. In 1807, after numerous failures, Robert Fulton successfully sent his steam-powered *Clermont* up the Hudson from New York to Albany. Within five years, a steamboat had paddled from Pittsburgh to New Orleans, and by 1830, steamboats dominated America’s navigable rivers. Steam defied wind and currents and turned rivers into highways, stimulating production of corn, wheat, pork, and cotton, and making it possible for farmers to purchase goods from distant manufacturers. Steamships began crossing the Atlantic in 1838, and a voyage that once took months now took fifteen days, though service remained costly and unreliable for decades. Steam engines also created an enormous market for the energy of wood and coal, with immediate impact on mining and timbering. When canals and steamboats funneled western trade to New York City, Boston, and Philadelphia, Baltimore sought overland alternatives to avoid eclipse. The earliest “rail roads” used horses to pull cars along a railed track, but in 1825, English inventor George Stephenson re- --- placed the horses with a rolling steam engine. The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad brought his invention to America in 1830, and a South Carolina line that diverted trade from Savannah to Charleston soon followed. Railroads crossed terrain that waterways could not and outdistanced canals by 1840. Over 30,000 miles of track had opened by 1860, creating a seemingly endless market for iron. An expanding network covered the Northeast and Midwest, and long feeder routes connected the richest plantation districts to southern ports. The fastest passenger railroads did not go much faster than 30 miles per hour in 1860, and freight moved only a third as fast, but the speed of both had dramatically improved while the cost had plummeted. ### THE COMMUNICATION REVOLUTION Improved communications proved just as important as better transportation, and dramatically expanded American newspapers. In 1790, 92 newspapers—almost all of them four-page weeklies—had reported on the Washington administration. Forty years later, 650 journals were hotly debating the conduct of President Andrew Jackson, 65 of them dailies. By the eve of the Civil War, the number of American newspapers exceeded 3,700. Early newspapers had limited circulation, for a single issue cost between six and eight cents and copies were sold only at the printer’s office. A yearly subscription cost almost a week’s wages for a common laborer, so many readers followed the news at their local tavern or lending library. Most papers were proudly partisan, reprinted long, dense speeches by political favorites instead of news stories, and freely mixed editorial comments with factual reporting. Editors spread information over long distances by exchanging free copies and reprinting the stories they received. Densely peopled streets and sidewalks formed new settings for reading and discussing information that encouraged more popular kinds of news than dry accounts of business or politics. Beginning with Benjamin Day’s *New York Sun* in 1833, innovative editors linked these new reading tastes with new methods of printing, papermaking, and distributing printed material to produce sensationalist journals that transformed urban communication. Newsboys hawked the *Sun* for only a penny, and its imitators soon flooded cities from Boston to Baltimore. The penny press drew more revenue from street sales and advertising than subscriptions and political patronage, and often --- ignored politics for dramatic stories of crime, scandal, and freakish accidents. By 1835, Day’s *Sun* sold 8,000 copies a day, twice the entire daily circulation of New York newspapers before he began. Mass sales financed a steam-powered cylindrical press that could print 20,000 copies a day. Presses were spinning even faster by mid-century, using molds, or stereotypes, to preserve and quickly reproduce a page of type. In 1841, editor Horace Greeley introduced his *New York Tribune*, which combined the price and format of the penny press with careful reporting and increased separation of news from editorials. Together with the spread of rural weeklies, the cheap new urban papers nearly quadrupled newspaper circulation in the 1840s. Keeping pace, other new machines increased the production of inexpensive paper and unleashed a flood of affordable books, magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, and images. Communication changed again after 1841, when New England inventor Samuel F. B. Morse perfected a magnetic telegraph that sent instantaneous messages over vast distances. Congress paid for the first telegraph line, running from Washington to Baltimore, but declined to purchase the invention itself, so telegraphy remained a private enterprise. Businessmen quickly saw its value for transmitting commodity prices and business news, but uses of the telegraph soon expanded. When war broke out with Mexico in 1846, New York newspaper readers got battlefield reports as fast as the generals, thanks to the telegraph. The new medium quickly seemed indispensable. ## Public Support and Private Initiative The Market Revolution needed more than new technology. Private fortunes were often too small, or investors too cautious, to assume all the costs and risks of major projects like canals or railroads. Promoters also felt the need for new laws and judicial principles to safeguard their investments and to regulate relations between different businesses. Above all, buyers and sellers needed sources of credit and a dependable currency to do business with each other. Americans combined public and private initiatives to carry out these tasks. ### THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT One of the most important government contributions came from the US Constitution itself. Devised in part for the needs of commerce, --- the Constitution laid the groundwork for a national market economy by abolishing commercial barriers between the states, protecting property rights throughout the Union, forbidding anticommercial state policies like stay laws and inflationary paper money, and granting Congress power over postal service, patents, and bankruptcies. Alexander Hamilton went further by harnessing the national debt for development capital and establishing a nearly uniform national currency through the Bank of the United States. Led by Chief Justice Marshall, the Supreme Court endorsed Hamilton’s broad construction of the Constitution and affirmed the economic powers of the federal government. Federalists were not the only supporters of economic development. Jefferson’s famous dictate “Let our workshops remain in Europe” acknowledged the need for long-distance trade, and some Jeffersonians thought that a people’s government should promote it with direct investments. Congress allotted money from public land sales to road construction in 1802. It drew on these funds in 1811 to begin constructing the National Road, which started at Cumberland, Maryland, and led through the Appalachians to the Ohio River at what is now Wheeling, West Virginia. As intended, the National Road became an important highway for western expansion, and further extensions took it to Vandalia, Illinois, by the middle of the nineteenth century. The War of 1812 fed demands for federal support of economic change. In 1811, Republican congressmen still thought the Bank of the United States was unconstitutional and would not renew its charter. Without a national bank, the wartime government had trouble borrowing money or transferring it from one region to another. When state banks then faltered and stopped exchanging their paper money for coin, experts warned that specie payments might not resume without guidance from a well-managed national bank. Lacking a national transportation system, moreover, the army was unable to move troops and supplies to the battlefronts, so the Canadian invasions had failed and General Andrew Jackson’s forces had nearly collapsed from starvation. Manufacturing posed other challenges. Even before the war, early cotton mills and steamboats pointed to an industrial future. Jefferson’s embargo and the war itself had also stimulated manufacturing by forcing Americans to produce what they once imported. When peace came, the new producers did not want their infant industries to succumb to British competition, so owners and workers begged Congress --- for protection. Just as important, political and military leaders foresaw that future wars would require foundries to cast cannons, mills to weave sailcloth, and roads to move troops. Regardless of constitutional barriers or agrarian ideals, fostering American industry might be a military necessity. In 1816, a Republican Congress accepted this logic and adopted the United States’ first protective tariff, or import tax designed to make foreign goods too expensive to compete with domestic alternatives. States often created corporations to own and operate internal improvements. With some resemblance to the joint-stock companies that financed colonial explorations, corporations enabled individuals to pool their resources, but the corporation had additional privileges as an artificial legal person. It could own property, conduct business, sue and be sued, and outlive its individual owners, but it could only be established by a special law, or charter, passed by a state legislature. Unlike business partners, investors did not risk their entire fortunes in a corporation, but only the