who had consistently resisted it. Even after the Confederacy's foundation, Upper South loyalists scrambled for a compromise that would keep their own states in the Union and persuade the secessionists to return. Senator John J. Crittenden of Kentucky led a congressional committee that devised a series of "unrepealable" constitutional amendments to guarantee the future of slavery and protect its indefinite expansion, either in the West's new territories or in Latin America. Abraham Lincoln would not accept such arrangements, for the Crittenden Compromise would require the Republicans to renounce their platform of nonexpansion. "We have just carried an election on principles fairly stated to the people," he reminded Republican leaders. "Now we are told in advance, the government shall be broken up, unless we surrender to those we have beaten." The Crittenden Compromise repudiated majority rule, Lincoln insisted, and thus America's republican principles. "If we surrender, it is the end of us," he warned, and efforts at compromise collapsed. Making no promises, the president-elect slipped secretly into Washington to avoid several threats against his life and prepared to take the oath of office on March 4, 1861. * Americans struggled without success to heal the sectional rifts exposed by western expansion. The Compromise of 1850 was an elaborate set of trade-offs that supporters praised as a "final settlement" of the slavery issue, but parts of it were deeply offensive to one section or another and few citizens could accept all of it. In 1854, Congress quit searching for an acceptable package of rewards and concessions to offer each section. In the Kansas-Nebraska Act, it tried instead to hand the problem to the western settlers themselves, a solution known as popular sovereignty. When that approach brought open warfare to Kansas, the Republican Party arose on the belief that slavery threatened free government itself. Republicans vowed to end the expansion of slavery with no compromises whatsoever, and when Republican --- Abraham Lincoln won the presidency in 1860, seven states seceded from the Union. The president-elect faced a deeply ruptured Union, for both sides had come to question their rivals’ commitment to republican values. In fact, slavery burdened American culture, government, and society with intolerable contradictions, and forced the two sections to defend competing aspects of the same Revolutionary heritage. Secessionists defended self-determination for communities of white men, claimed they all benefited from slavery whether they owned human property or not, and demanded protection for their way of life. Republicans countered that slavery bestowed advantages denied to nonslaveholders and allowed masters to create an unrepublican aristocracy. If these privileges ended, all white men would gain equal opportunity to enjoy the republic’s full benefits. Very shortly, war would test these rival visions. --- # Map 6 Following the election of President Abraham Lincoln in 1860, eleven southern states seceded from the Union and formed the Confederate States of America. Four slaveholding states remained in the Union, and West Virginia broke away from Virginia to become a new Union state. Map by Gabriel Moss. <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Legend</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td>■</td> <td>Border State</td> <td></td> </tr> <tr> <td>~</td> <td>Confederate State</td> <td></td> </tr> <tr> <td>□</td> <td>Major Civil War Battle</td> <td></td> </tr> <tr> <td>0 300 600 mi</td> <td colspan="2"></td> </tr> </tbody> </table> <table> <thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">Map of the United States and Territories, 1860</th> </tr> </thead> <tbody> <tr> <td colspan="2">MEXICO</td> <td colspan="5" rowspan="2">Gulf of Mexico</td> </tr> <tr> <td>NEW MEXICO TERRITORY</td> <td>TEXAS ~</td> </tr> <tr> <td>COLORADO TERRITORY</td> <td>KANSAS (Union State)</td> <td>INDIAN TERRITORY</td> <td>NEBRASKA TERRITORY</td> <td>INDIANA (Union State)</td> <td>ILLINOIS (Union State)</td> <td>IOWA (Union State)</td> </tr> <tr> <td>DAKOTA TERRITORY</td> <td colspan="2">NORTH AMERICA</td> <td colspan="2">BRITISH NORTH AMERICA</td> <td>MINNESOTA (Union State)</td> <td>MISSOURI □ ~</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td colspan="2">Atlantic Ocean</td> <td colspan="2"></td> <td>WISCONSIN (Union State)</td> <td>KANSAS (Union State)</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td>MAINE (Union State)</td> <td>NEW YORK (Union State)</td> <td>PENNSYLVANIA (Union State)</td> <td>OHIO (Union State)</td> <td>MICHIGAN (Union State)</td> <td>WEST VIRGINIA (Union State)</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td>NEW JERSEY (Union State)</td> <td>CONNECTICUT (Union State)</td> <td>RHODE ISLAND (Union State)</td> <td>MASSACHUSETTS (Union State)</td> <td>VERMONT (Union State)</td> <td>NEW HAMPSHIRE (Union State)</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td colspan="2">DE (Union State)</td> <td colspan="2">MD (Union State)</td> <td colspan="2">VA ~</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td colspan="2">NC ~</td> <td colspan="2">SC ~</td> <td colspan="2">GA ~</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td colspan="2">FL ~</td> <td colspan="2">AL ~</td> <td colspan="2">MS ~</td> </tr> <tr> <td></td> <td colspan="2">LA ~</td> <td colspan="2">TX ~</td> <td colspan="2"></td> </tr> </tbody> </table> --- # CHAPTER 14 ## "A New Birth of Freedom," 1861–1865 On January 12, 1862, nine months after the beginning of the Civil War, John Boston of Owensville, Maryland, scratched out a halting but joyful letter to his wife, Elizabeth. “This Day I can Adress you thank god as a free man,” he exulted. The journey to freedom had not been easy. “I had a little truble in giting away,” Boston admitted. “But as the lord led the Children of Isrel to the land of Canon So he led me to a land Whare fredom Will rain in spite of earth and hell.” John Boston’s Promised Land was the 14th New York militia regiment, filled with Brooklyn abolitionists and camped near Upton Hill in northern Virginia. Many Union soldiers had no interest in freeing slaves, but John Boston and fugitives like him could discover those who did. “I am With a very nice man and have All that hart Can Wish,” Boston told Elizabeth. “But My Dear I Cant express my grate desire that I Have to See you I trust the time Will Come When We shal meet again” When the war began, Union officials had not anticipated or welcomed the initiative of men like John Boston. Everyone knew that slavery had led to war, but not all slave states had seceded, not all slaveholders were disloyal, and not all northerners wanted abolition. In fact, John Boston’s owner claimed to be a unionist from the loyal slave state of Maryland. Seizing or intercepting Boston’s letter, he showed it to state officials who used it to support their protests that elements in the army were violating government policy and attacking private property. Abraham Lincoln hated slavery but declared the anti-emancipation policy himself. In his first annual message to Congress, delivered only weeks before John Boston’s escape, the president called “the integrity of the Union . . . the primary object of the contest.” Probably dreading --- the race war freely predicted by the opponents of abolition, he insisted that the conflict must not “degenerate into a violent and remorseless revolutionary struggle.” Before long, however, the war’s revolutionary implications seemed inescapable, due in large part to the actions of people like John Boston and his army friends. The fugitives ran to the army because they knew instinctively that a war for the Union could not spare slavery. Regardless of official policy, moreover, Union commanders had no interest in returning these able-bodied workers to their masters, whether loyal or not, and soon the runaways were building fortifications, preparing food, driving wagons, and tending animals for the Union Army. Their work did not stop with civilian tasks. “They are acquainted with all the roads, paths fords and other natural features of the country and they make excellent guides,” admitted a spokesman for General Abner Doubleday, later known (erroneously) as the inventor of baseball. “They will not therefore be exclude[d].” And finally, after much debate, some 200,000 African American men entered the US Army and Navy, where they fought directly for the freedom of themselves and their families. Men and women like John and Elizabeth Boston redefined the Civil War. If blacks fought for the Union, how could the Union desert them? As this insight sank in, Abraham Lincoln gained legal and political justification for turning a war for the Union into a war against slavery. A year before the Emancipation Proclamation, John Boston was certain that freedom was his. Like many others in the army, he painfully remembered the wife and children he left behind, but he urged Elizabeth to be patient. “Dear you must make your Self content,” he counseled. “I am free from al the Slavers Lash” Momentous as it was, emancipation was not the only revolutionary outcome of the Civil War. Both sides needed huge armies, professionally trained and disciplined for unquestioning obedience. They needed the latest in modern weapons, produced by advanced machinery, distributed through efficient bureaucracies, and transported by smoothly coordinated systems of railroads. The armies and their weapons would cost the winners colossal sums that required a vast new system of federal loans and taxes, administered by more federal bureaucrats, and a giant system of national banks, concentrated on Wall Street. The result would be a radically new federal currency, an ever-stronger industrial economy, and an economic transformation that made the Market Revolution of Andrew Jackson’s day look trifling. The mechanical, disciplined style of the Union Army would mesh with the regimented --- demands of a new age of industry and capital, making efficiency, subordination, and centralization into cultural ideals. No aspect of American public life would ever be the same. Launched to preserve American traditions, the Civil War profoundly transformed them. The end of slavery stemmed from the actions of ordinary Americans like John and Elizabeth Boston as much as decisions by Abraham Lincoln and Jefferson Davis. The war they joined took as many as 750,000 lives and convinced the survivors that many of their oldest traditions had become incompatible with republican government. As President Lincoln would put it on the battlefield at Gettysburg, the war required “a new birth of freedom” to guarantee that “government of the people, by the people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth.” ### “And the War Came . . .” The Union and Confederate governments both hoped to avoid war when Abraham Lincoln took office, but neither would surrender its core demands. Southern leaders swore that disunion was permanent and demanded that the remaining states accept their independence. Northerners insisted just as firmly that secession was illegal and that the South’s departure would spell the end of majority rule and republican government. These differences exploded into open warfare when the North refused to surrender federal military bases on southern soil. The attack on Fort Sumter released years of mounting tension, as both sides rushed to prepare for what they believed would be a quick and easy victory. #### LINCOLN’S INAUGURATION As southern states responded to the election of Abraham Lincoln by seceding one by one, the federal government lay virtually paralyzed. Though elected in November, the Republican candidate would not take his oath of office until March 4, 1861. After a lifetime of compliance with southern demands, President James Buchanan drew the line at secession itself and declared that no state could legally leave the Union on its own, but he took no action to end the stalemate or coerce the seceding states. In the absence of presidential leadership, congressional figures struggled with a now-familiar reflex to seek a compromise. In Janu- --- ary, Senator John J. Crittenden of Kentucky suggested a series of unrepealable constitutional amendments to divide the United States along the Missouri Compromise line and guarantee slavery in all current or future territories to its south, but secessionists and Republicans were equally uninterested. In Virginia, senior statesmen from both sections gathered in the Peace Convention to discuss similar measures, but they too foundered on a fundamental fact: the seceding states had no interest in returning, while Republicans opposed slavery in all the territories and would not retreat from the principle that had won them the election. Democrats and some Republicans implored Lincoln to make a public statement to quiet southern fears and stop or reverse the Union’s dissolution, but the president-elect firmly refused. Biding his time in Springfield, Illinois, Lincoln repeated Republican pledges and made no further commitments. When Inauguration Day approached, he slowly traveled to Washington, with frequent stops to address the anxious crowds who gathered around his train. Before arriving, however, he donned a disguise and slipped secretly into the capital to avoid a serious assassination plot. The decision was prudent but created an impression of cowardice that sarcastic observers did not hesitate to mock. Just as Jefferson Davis and other southern leaders had used the moment of secession to spell out their reasons for seeking independence, Lincoln used his inaugural address to make a clear, firm case for the Union. He repeated that the federal government had no powers over slavery in the states and affirmed his support for the Fugitive Slave Act. Southerners, he promised, should not fear for their lives or property under a Republican administration. He did insist, however, that the Union must not break. Like Andrew Jackson before him, Lincoln called the federal union a perpetual government, not a mere compact to be broken at will. The Declaration of Independence and the Articles of Confederation had created the Union, he said; the Constitution had only made it “more perfect,” which to him meant more permanent. “Clearly the central idea of secession is the essence of anarchy,” Lincoln reasoned, for if the minority would not submit to the majority, elections were pointless, democracy was meaningless, and the nation could splinter indefinitely. Without binding majority rule, in other words, “anarchy or despotism . . . is all that is left,” and the American experiment in republicanism would end. In effect, Abraham Lincoln had committed himself to a literal version of Daniel Webster’s famous slogan: “Liberty *and* Union, now and forever, one and inseparable!” A bit naively, Lincoln believed that the majority of white southern- --- ers remained loyal and would soon return. Until then, he would continue to collect federal revenues and “hold, occupy, and possess the property and places belonging to the Government.” He would not be the first to use force. In closing, Lincoln invoked the solemn memory of the American Revolution and urged southerners to return to the national family. “We are not enemies, but friends,” he pleaded. “The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they must be, by the better angels of our nature.” Even while ducking the emancipation issue, Lincoln would use his first annual message to repeat the Republicans’ defense of free labor. While slavery’s advocates contended that civilization required a class of degraded laborers, Lincoln denied any need for permanent social hierarchy. “Labor is prior to and independent of capital,” he insisted. Though wage earners served their employers, hard work and diligence could make them property holders and employers themselves. “The prudent, penniless beginner in the world,” he explained, “labors for wages awhile, saves a surplus with which to buy tools or land for himself, then labors on his own account another while, and at length hires another new beginner to help him.” In other words, capital could not oppress labor because every employer was a former worker and every worker a potential employer. So long as labor was not degraded by enslavement, the “right to rise” lifted free society over every alternative based on privilege. Lincoln thus defended the Union on the basis of democracy, or majority rule, and on the moral superiority of freedom over slavery, not only for the slaves, but for all workers and citizens. While directed against slaveholders, his arguments persisted in American culture as a rebuke of foreign inequalities and a reply to Americans who protested “wage slavery.” The North’s faith in its own moral, political, and economic preeminence became a lasting pillar of postwar civic life and a key theme in America’s response to foreign and domestic challenges. No matter how soothing in tone, the inaugural address carried deadly menace to Confederates. Lincoln’s refusal to abandon the symbols of federal authority in the South—especially military installations—struck southern leaders as a slap in the face. As they saw it, the Confederacy must now seize these places or create expectations of eventual surrender. Studying the president’s subtle promise to answer force with force, the *Richmond Dispatch* concluded grimly that “the Inaugural Address . . . inaugurates civil war. . . . The sword is drawn and --- the scabbard thrown away. . . . Ere long Virginia may be engaged in a life and death struggle for independence, honor, and for all that makes existence worth living." ## FORT SUMTER AND THE RUSH TO WAR State troops had occupied most federal military positions in the South soon after secession. The most important exception was Charleston’s Fort Sumter, whose commander, Major Robert Anderson, had sheltered his forces by moving to the island stronghold. South Carolinians denounced his action as a clear sign that he would fight to stay in Charleston. President Buchanan sent supplies and reinforcements soon after the move, but South Carolina artillery drove the steamer away. Unable to assist, Anderson held his fire, and an anxious truce settled over the city. Lincoln hoped that the seceding states would eventually return voluntarily, but Anderson quickly reported that he only had provisions for six more weeks. The news made a lengthy standoff impossible and presented Lincoln with three stark choices: First, he could order Anderson to surrender and accept the reality of disunion. Alternatively, he could fight for Sumter and take the blame for starting a war. But he took a third option and informed the governor of South Carolina that he would send a ship with food and water only. Others would follow with arms and reinforcements, but they would not approach if the first ship completed its mission. If shooting must come, Lincoln would force the Confederacy to begin. Meeting in Montgomery, President Davis and his cabinet accepted the challenge. If Lincoln would not surrender, they reasoned, it was better to show resolve and take the fort. When the relief ship neared, Confederate bombardment began on the morning of April 12, 1861. Bad weather kept the armed escort at bay and Union gunners could not return fire effectively. Anderson finally surrendered when a day and a half’s pounding had reduced Fort Sumter to rubble, though his men escaped all casualties. Upon hearing the news, President Lincoln proclaimed an insurrection and called for 75,000 volunteers to suppress it. The fall of Fort Sumter and the president’s call for troops electrified both sections. Years of tension gave way at last to action, and millions threw themselves into war with relief. Like Lincoln himself, the great body of northern voters believed that secession would destroy America’s republican experiment. They were also heartily sick of what --- they saw as southern arrogance and welcomed the chance to strike back. Governors and legislatures scrambled to provide the troops that Lincoln had requested. Volunteer militia units intensified their preparations and new units sprang up daily. Spontaneous meetings cheered the flag and resolved to make every sacrifice. Journalists rejoiced as they felt that the era of degrading submission to southern insolence had ended at last. "Since the landing of the Pilgrims," a Boston editor exulted, "nothing has occurred on the American Continent equal in grandeur and sublimity to the uprising of the people during the last seven days." "At last we have a government!" cried others. Democrats matched Republicans in patriotic fervor. Northern Democrats had long relied on southern votes and steadily pleaded for compromise, but like their hero Andrew Jackson, they always assumed that the South could settle its grievances within the Union. When Sumter fell, northern Democrats immediately denounced the rebellion and endorsed the war to crush it. Stephen A. Douglas pledged support in person, and then told a Chicago rally, "There can be no neutrals in the war, *only patriots — or traitors.*" From prominent politicians to common soldiers, northerners called the war essential for defending republican principles. Many shared the feelings of one unusually eloquent New Jersey private, who wrote to his family, "We will be held responsible before God if we don't do our part in helping to transmit this boon of civil & religious liberty down to succeeding generations." Confederates welcomed war with equal zeal. Like Abraham Lincoln, Jefferson Davis had stressed in his