continued to move southward. Fearing that France could lure away their dependent tribes, the Iroquois drew closer to Britain and Virginia to preserve their dominance in the Ohio country. In 1754, imperial officials, Iroquois representatives, and delegates from all the colonies north of Virginia met in Albany, New York, to foster cooperation in case of war with France. There Benjamin Franklin, a delegate from Pennsylvania, proposed the Albany Plan of Union, which would place the British mainland colonies under a single government to manage Indian affairs, including war, trade, and land purchases, to make land grants beyond the existing colonies, to organize and govern new settlements, to raise and equip armed forces, and to finance them with quitrents and import duties. Each colony would keep its own laws and identity and govern itself internally. This blend of local and central authority foreshadowed the structure of the future United States government, but colonial and imperial authorities rejected Franklin’s plan as too ambitious. A Mohawk chief named Hendrick had warned the Albany Congress that the French and their Indian allies were already preparing for another war by building a string of forts to connect Lake Ontario with the Forks. “Look at the French,” he mocked. “They are men; they are fortifying everywhere; but we are ashamed to say it; you are like women, bare and open, without any fortifications.” Recognizing the threat, London officials ordered Virginia to warn them off and protect the interests of the Ohio Company. The task fell to a small expedition commanded by a promising young major named George Washington, --- 21-year-old half-brother of Ohio Company shareholders Lawrence and Augustine Washington. Washington had been born into the lesser Virginia gentry in 1732. His father died while he was still a child, depriving young George of the English education received by his older half-brothers. The ambitious youth studied hard to master the science of land surveying instead and grew accustomed to the rough work of measuring large tracts in the backcountry wilderness. Six feet three inches in height, with an athletic build and strength to match, young Washington wanted to excel in public leadership more than planting or surveying, and he pulled hard on his family’s connections to win the governor’s permission to confront the intruders. Unsurprisingly, the French refused to blink, and sent Washington back to Williamsburg while they occupied the Forks and began constructing Fort Duquesne to guard the spot. The following spring, Washington returned with Tanaghrisson, the local Iroquois half king, and a larger force of whites and Iroquois, defeating a small French party near the Forks. The sequel might have been a truce, but Tanaghrisson wanted no stalemate that could leave the French in his domain. Probably hoping to provoke a conflict that the French would lose, he stepped forward when the skirmish ended and whispered to the fallen French commander, “You are not dead yet, my father.” Then he suddenly tomahawked the stricken officer and defiantly wiped his hands in his victim’s brains before scalping him. His tribesmen then fell on the other French prisoners, as Virginians tried to save as many as possible. The Virginians fell back to a small stockade named Fort Necessity but could not hold it against a French and Indian counterattack. Once again, the French sent Washington home with another refusal to move. If the half king wanted a full-scale war, his tactic worked. Loss of the Forks prompted British authorities to order a major assault on New France while France launched a recruiting drive for Indian allies that would bring in thousands of fighters from the Ohio Valley and as far away as Georgia and modern Iowa. In 1755, London sent General Edward Braddock to the Chesapeake with 2,000 Irish regulars and orders to capture Fort Duquesne. Massachusetts forces headed west to capture another French fort on the Niagara River while New Yorkers marched on Lake Champlain. These offensives all failed disastrously. Accompanied by Washington and his Virginia militia, Braddock blundered into a French and Indian ambush as they approached the Forks. --- Braddock died along with half his men, but Washington won credit for bravery in the battle and the subsequent retreat, and gained command of Virginia’s battered army. Hearing of Braddock’s defeat, the Massachusetts expedition abandoned its attack on Niagara, and the New Yorkers were repulsed from Lake Champlain. Fort Oswego, Britain’s outpost on Lake Ontario, fell the following year. France drew heavily on its Indian allies in these victories, but the Iroquois—whose half king had touched off the explosion—gave no active aid to Britain until later in the war. Britain suffered another painful loss in the summer of 1757, when a mixed force of French and Huron Indians advanced on Fort William Henry, located on Lake George in northern New York. Vastly outnumbered, the British surrendered after a brief siege and accepted French terms that allowed them to withdraw unharmed after laying down their arms. This time it was France’s Indian allies who refused to accept the limitations of European warfare. Deprived of the captives and plunder they expected, Indians swept into the nearly empty fort and killed its wounded occupants before turning on the retreating British for booty, prisoners, and more scalps. Exaggerated accounts of the Fort William Henry massacre soon inflamed the British and American side and fed the Americans’ fear of Indians for decades to come. Defeats in America did not stop the British, and fighting spread worldwide. In Europe, France’s allies Austria and Russia attacked Britain’s partner Prussia in order to reclaim the province of Silesia. French and British trading companies fought each other in India, using local allies and their own troops, while the British navy seized French sugar colonies and African slaving posts. In America, Braddock’s defeat emboldened the Shawnees, Delawares, and other western Indians to defy their Iroquois overlords, attack white settlements from Maine to Virginia, and push the frontier back as many as 50 miles eastward in some places. Though Britain had stumbled at first, the tide of battle slowly turned as William Pitt, a new British minister, borrowed massive sums to assemble major forces and pay the colonies’ military expenses. Forts Duquesne and Niagara surrendered, along with the French post on Lake Champlain, which the victors renamed Fort Ticonderoga. Louisburg, the French fortress that commanded the mouth of the St. Lawrence, fell in 1758. A year later, General James Wolfe ascended that river to besiege Quebec. Leading a small force up a steep opening in the cliffs below the city’s defenses, the attackers won a short battle --- at the top in which Wolfe and his French antagonist, the marquis de Montcalm, both died. Montreal fell to Britain the following year, and France’s Indian allies dispersed as British naval victories cut the flow of supplies they relied on. In the end, even a Spanish alliance could not stave off French defeat. In the 1763 Peace of Paris, Britain acquired the entire colony of New France and the half of Louisiana that lay east of the Mississippi, while Spain took the western half of Louisiana and passed its own colony of Florida to Great Britain. British allies likewise triumphed in Europe while the British East India Company laid the basis for another future empire by besting French forces in India and acquiring extensive territories of its own. The loss of New France and Louisiana entirely expelled the French from the mainland of North America. The Seven Years’ War had profound consequences for the colonies and the entire Atlantic world. Its costs prompted Britain to tax its colonies, starting a train of events that led to the American Revolution. France lost most of its American empire and incurred massive debts that contributed to its own revolution and the overthrow of its monarchy. And the French Revolution led to a successful slave revolt in the Caribbean colony of Haiti, with massive challenges to slavery throughout the Americas. Despite these momentous changes, the imperial rivalry between Britain and France would continue for decades in wars spawned by the American and French Revolutions. ### PONTIAC RISES A European treaty did not end all the fighting. Combat in America had subsided when Montreal fell, but France’s former Indian allies wanted Britain to assume the roles of ally, judge, and benefactor long played by French officials. Using gifts, trade, and diplomacy to reestablish the Middle Ground conflicted with traditional British policies, however, and Lord Jeffery Amherst, commander in chief of Britain’s American forces, spurned the Indians’ demands as expensive and presumptuous. Instead, he banned the sale of alcohol to Indians and strictly limited their purchases of gunpowder and ammunition, a step that brought famine and severely restricted the deerskin trade. Native Americans responded to this distress with a pan-Indian military and spiritual movement to defend their independence and restore an earlier culture. Similar efforts would also appear in the wake of the American Revolution and the War of 1812. The first began in 1761, when a Dela- --- ware prophet named Neolin preached that the Master of Life was punishing Indians for abandoning their traditions. Neolin told his hearers to regain the Master’s favor by renouncing white culture, including liquor, guns, and textiles, and returning to traditional clothing and weaponry. The message spread from tribe to tribe in the upper country, the Ohio country, the Illinois country, and even farther, convincing converts that the tribes should unite to expel the British from the Mississippi Valley. In the spring of 1763, a war chief named Pontiac took the first step by organizing a siege of Fort Detroit by Potawatomis, Hurons, and his own Ottawa tribe. As word spread over the summer, other bands joined in attacking British bases throughout the western territory, from Illinois to the Forks of the Ohio, and captured all but Niagara, Detroit, and Fort Pitt. Amherst was so angered by the wave of assaults that he authorized the distribution of smallpox-infected blankets to one party of besiegers, though the epidemic was already rampant and his proposed experiment in germ warfare may have made little difference. In the east, frontier residents of Paxton, or Paxtang, Pennsylvania, feared attack so much that enraged mobs murdered 20 helpless Indian noncombatants in 1763 before marching on Philadelphia to demand the deaths of 140 more. Patient diplomacy finally deflected the Paxton Boys, but anti-Indian passions ran dangerously high. Pontiac eventually lifted the siege of Detroit, but other forts kept falling over 1764. Amherst tried to crush the uprising with massive military force, but he failed and was recalled. His successor, Sir Thomas Gage, was no more successful. Fighting gradually subsided into a stalemate. Pontiac himself was only one of the campaign’s many leaders, but in a series of 1765 peace conferences, he persuaded most of his allies to accept a return to the prewar status quo. In other words, without expelling the British or surrendering their own lands, the tribes would resume trading and allow the British to reoccupy their forts. The last Indian combatants abandoned the fight that year by crossing the Mississippi into Spanish Louisiana. The British returned to their older policies of gifts and trade and reluctantly accepted the role of paternal leadership and mediation once exercised by the French. War had claimed 2,000 colonial lives and untold numbers of Indians. --- # A STANDING ARMY AND REVENUE REFORM Britain and its colonies celebrated the outcome of the Seven Years’ War but struggled with its consequences. Wartime expenses had doubled the British national debt, to just under £130,000,000, and interest payments required half the government’s annual revenue. Canada, Florida, and the Ohio Valley would all be valuable in the long run, but Pontiac’s War helped convince the government that the new territories needed guarding by an army of 10,000 men costing £400,000 per year—as much to guard the Indians from the colonists as vice versa. Officials also decided to reorganize imperial government. The Treaty of Paris left Britain with an American empire of 26 colonies, including the 13 that later joined the American Revolution, a clutch of sugar islands led by Barbados and Jamaica, East and West Florida, and 5 in what is now Canada: Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Rupert’s Land around Hudson Bay, and Quebec. Most of the North American colonies had elected assemblies that vigorously defended their autonomy. Governors had complained for years that the colonies were too independent and uncooperative, but centralization raised thorny constitutional issues. Most colonies had been founded by royal authority and “belonged” to Britain through their allegiance to the Crown. The Glorious Revolution had subordinated the king to Parliament, however, and Parliament’s authority in the empire was unclear. It regulated the colonies’ trade with the Navigation Acts, but could it govern their internal affairs? Could it tax them? Britain’s authority supposedly flowed through royal governors, but their instructions had no legal force until assemblies enacted them. In practice, the colonies were governed by their own elites instead of king or Parliament, an arrangement that parliamentary leader Edmund Burke later called “salutary neglect.” George III was the young and inexperienced king who oversaw the process of reform. Earnest but dull, George inherited his grandfather’s throne in 1760, at age 22. He wanted to be a good king but distrusted politicians and longed to exercise real power. Over the next decade, chief ministers came and went as George struggled to find one he liked, and colonial government suffered from political gyrations that usually had little or nothing to do with events in America. When peace arrived in 1763, George Grenville was Chancellor of the Exchequer and First Lord of the Treasury, and he developed what historians have called a new imperial policy to raise money and control the colonies. --- The first step was a proclamation forbidding settlement beyond the crest of the Appalachian Mountains, intended to reduce the chance of costly Indian wars. The new army of 10,000 troops would enforce the Proclamation Line of 1763 from their frontier forts, and the Quartering Act of 1765 required assemblies to shoulder part of the cost. Passed to satisfy London merchants who hated payment in inflated bills, the Currency Act of 1764 made these costs harder to pay by forbidding the use of colonial paper money. All these measures curbed colonial freedom of action and reminded sensitive Americans of power-hungry schemes condemned by the Real Whig, or Country Party, tradition. Grenville first looked for revenue in the lucrative trade between New England and the Caribbean. New Englanders made large quantities of rum from West Indian molasses, but to keep them from trading with the French, the Molasses Act of 1733 had imposed a tax of sixpence a gallon on molasses imported from outside the empire. When British islands could not supply all the syrup the distillers wanted, they still bought from the French and bribed the ill-paid customs inspectors to look the other way. Even without this abuse, however, the Molasses Act could never have raised much money. The duty made foreign molasses too expensive to use, so strict enforcement would have ended both importation and revenue. As a result, Americans did not think of the Molasses Act as a real tax, but only a trade regulation. Grenville decided to change that policy. He reformed the customs agency to make it more honest and efficient, and he set the Royal Navy to chasing smugglers. More important, the Sugar Act of 1764 reduced the duty on foreign molasses to an affordable threepence a gallon and tightened collection procedures. Violators still faced vice-admiralty courts, without juries, and could lose their ships and cargoes if convicted. Royal governors, customs inspectors, and naval captains would divide the proceeds, creating handsome incentives for rigorous enforcement. Colonial merchants soon complained that corrupt officials used minor technical violations as pretexts to confiscate their property. Grenville ignored their objections, however, and the Sugar Act began to raise a modest annual revenue of £20,000. ## Imperial Crisis Grenville's new imperial policy proved extraordinarily unpopular in the colonies. Americans claimed they did not object to paying their fair share of imperial expenses, but the Currency Act would make it --- very difficult to find the cash to pay them. More fundamentally, the new measures reduced the colonies’ long-established powers of self-government. The elites who dominated the colonial assemblies naturally resented this loss of authority, but even ordinary subjects began to protest what many came to believe were “unconstitutional” threats to American liberty. ## RESISTING THE STAMP ACT Colonists objected to the Sugar Act, but they were outraged when Grenville announced plans for a colonial stamp tax modeled after a similar levy in Britain. The law required stamped paper for publications and a wide range of legal and commercial transactions. Like the taxes on molasses, moreover, the stamps would have to be purchased with pounds sterling, or official British currency, just when the Currency Act had stretched the demand for scarce coinage even tighter. After spending a year to collect more information, Parliament passed the Stamp Act on March 22, 1765, and set November 1 as the date it would take effect. A storm of protest followed Patrick Henry’s outburst in the House of Burgesses. Every assembly on the mainland and several in the West Indies denounced the Stamp Act for taxing them without their consent, and public anger exploded from port towns to isolated villages. In a typical response, the inhabitants of Leicester, Massachusetts, blasted the new law as “contrary to the Rights of Mankind & Subversive of ye English Constitution,” with “a Direct Tendency, to bring us into a State of abject Slavery & Vassalage.” Complaints commonly stressed that the old Molasses Act was a trade regulation in the form of a tax, but taxation for actual revenue was “taxation without representation.” If the king needed money, he should ask each assembly for an appropriation, just as he asked Parliament. If colonists submitted to the moderate but unconstitutional costs of the Stamp Act, worse impositions would inevitably follow, for illicit power would never restrain itself voluntarily. Before long, the colonists would lose their liberty along with their property, as Country Party writers had predicted. As protests mounted, Massachusetts called for a meeting of all the colonies to present a united front, so in October 1765, the Stamp Act Congress convened in New York with delegates from nine colonies. It issued the firm but calmly worded Declaration of Rights and Grievances, which promised loyalty to the king and “due subordination” to --- Parliament, but insisted that taxation without consent broke fundamental English rights. Less abstractly, the congress also claimed that Americans did not have enough hard currency to pay for the stamps and that commercial restrictions like the Sugar Act would impair their purchases of British manufactures. The Sugar Act and the Stamp Act touched off a prolonged constitutional debate about colonial rights, mostly conducted through dueling pamphlets and newspaper essays that continued until independence. In this debate, the Crown’s writers usually declared that Parliament was the supreme authority in Britain, so British colonies must obey it. Colonial authors denied the claims of Parliament and called for a return to the “salutary neglect” they had enjoyed before 1763. Treasury spokesman Thomas Whately argued, for example, that Americans did not need to elect a member of Parliament to be represented there, because the elected members “virtually” represented the whole realm and not just the voters who sent them. Maryland lawyer Daniel Dulaney struck back, acknowledging that some British towns sent no one to the House of Commons but shared interests with those that did. Since British taxes would fall on everyone there, a member of Parliament might represent voters and nonvoters alike. But who in Britain was affected by a tax in America? Which British borough shared the conditions and circumstances of colonists across the ocean? While “virtual representation” might work in Britain, Dulaney declared, the idea was preposterous for America. Ministry spokesmen eventually abandoned the argument over representation and declared that every government must contain a sovereign, or ultimate, undivided authority. In Britain, the sovereign power was “the King in Parliament,” or the combined will of king, Lords, and Commons. For the empire to have any meaning, sovereign power could not be split between Parliament and the colonies, so Americans must obey Parliament whether they were represented there or not. This position put the colonies in a state of permanent inferiority to Britain itself, a situation they finally rejected. Unconcerned with theory, the ministry continued its plans to implement the Stamp Act, and colonists responded with direct action. Pressured by public anger, most merchants in New York, Boston, Philadelphia, and smaller ports signed nonimportation agreements pledging not to buy any British goods until the Stamp Act was repealed. Publicists followed with calls to replace British goods with homespun cloth and other colonial products. Semisecret bands called the Sons of Lib- --- erty led popular protests in every port. Mostly composed of artisans and shopkeepers of a distinctly lower social class than the merchants and lawyers who wrote the pamphlets and dominated the assemblies, the Sons of Liberty drew on longstanding English traditions of mob protest to completely block the operation of the Stamp Act. A REVOLUTION FROM BELOW? Events in Boston set the example for events that followed. Bostonians were well prepared for crowd actions, for lower-class leaders had long organized raucous popular parades to celebrate Pope’s Day, the anniversary of a foiled plot to impose Catholicism and “Stuart tyranny.” Going further, angry mobs had mobilized in 1747 to protect sailors from impressment, or forced service in the British navy. Over a decade later, when the end of the Seven Years’ War left Boston impoverished,