environment of "Bleeding Kansas," proslavery authorities could not arrest the perpetrators --- and antislavery authorities would not. Grimly satisfied, Brown began to tell his associates that slavery would never end without bloodshed. ## REPUBLICANS REACH FOR THE PRESIDENCY The first Republican national convention met in New York in the month following these events. In a prearranged maneuver, the Republicans nominated John C. Frémont for president while Nathaniel Banks, the nominee of the northern, or “North American,” faction of the Know-Nothings, dropped out of the race in his favor. The youthful explorer who had brought California to the Union in the Mexican War, Frémont was a dashing hero who had spoken out against slavery in the territories, and he had Democratic connections through his wife, the daughter of Missouri Jacksonian Thomas Hart Benton. Party managers deftly constructed a platform with lip service to nativism and the moral critique of slavery, but reserved its strongest language for the injuries that expanding slavery inflicted on whites. Among the Democrats, President Pierce and Stephen A. Douglas bore heavy responsibility for the Kansas fiasco and each effectively blocked the other from the party’s nomination. The choice went instead to James Buchanan, a colorless Pennsylvania doughface with a long record of party service dating back to Andrew Jackson’s day. The election of 1856 marked the national death of the Second Party System, though fragments persisted in some states. In the North, the contest essentially pitted Buchanan the Democrat against Frémont the Republican. Northern Whigs vanished and mostly turned Republican, along with former Democrats, Free Soilers, and North Americans who saw no other alternative to southern domination. Below the Mason-Dixon line, most Whigs professed to become Know-Nothings and renamed themselves the American Party, running Millard Fillmore against Democrat James Buchanan. The South contained few immigrants, but nativists tried to play on southern Protestants’ anti-Catholicism in hopes that a common fear of Rome could keep the North and South together and away from the Democrats. For the most part, Fillmore’s southern supporters were former Whigs who used the Know-Nothing perch to warn against Republicans and fire-eaters. Old alignments between Whigs and Democrats persisted in this guise, but the Whigs/Americans were not widely competitive beyond the Upper South. Democrats argued convincingly that Fillmore could never win, so every state he carried would simply subtract from --- Buchanan’s total and contribute to victory for the hated “Black Republicans.” If that happened, they predicted that the South would have no choice but secession, so a vote for Buchanan was both a vote for southern rights and a vote for the Union. Unable to refute this logic, the Americans carried Maryland but failed to win much more than 40 percent of the vote in any other southern state. Instead, Democrats carried all the other slave states by loudly boasting of their party’s proslavery record in Kansas and warning that Frémont’s victory would bring abolition, secession, and civil war. Republicans triumphed easily in New England and the upper Midwest, but faced serious difficulties elsewhere in the North. To soothe popular prejudice, they stressed slavery’s harm to whites rather than blacks, but Democrats warned that a vote for Frémont was a vote for secession and Negro equality, for “Black Republicans” were racial fanatics whose inexplicable fondness for Negroes would break up the Union. These arguments enabled Buchanan to add Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Illinois, Indiana, and California to his solid southern base and to win the election with 174 electoral votes over 114 for Frémont and 8 for Fillmore. Beginning in 1856, the Third Party System pitted Democrats against Republicans. It would not take its final shape until after the Civil War, when most white southerners became Democrats and black men used their new rights to vote Republican. The Republicans had nevertheless ejected the Know-Nothings as the Democrats’ only credible opponents in the North. They did so in part with concessions to nativism, but mostly because slavery, their defining issue, was a much more urgent question than immigration. Powerful and important debates over economic development once stifled the slavery debate, but when opponents reached a rough consensus on these questions, they no longer distinguished between the parties or distracted Americans from the insistent question of slavery. The emergence of the Republican Party as a northern sectional bloc in 1856 terrified white southerners. With no southern wing to placate, victorious “Black Republicans” might abolish southerners’ most valuable property, incite insurrection, and promote race war. Even without these fears, southern moderates found it increasingly hazardous to minimize the danger of “Black Republicans” for fear that fire-eaters would attack them for weakness. The election of 1856 also left the Democrats as the only major political organization with strong ties to both sections. Republicans worried --- that southerners would use those ties to extract endless concessions from northern Democrats who would do anything for high office. At the opposite extreme, genuine secessionist fire-eaters had the same concern in reverse, worrying that northern offers of sectional cooperation would blind opportunists to the need for southern independence. The fears of both groups of rivals would shape events in the next four years, as the national ties of the Democratic Party eroded. ## Buchanan's Frustrations These events were already unfolding as James Buchanan took office in 1857 and confronted dilemmas that had baffled his predecessors. Could he settle the slavery dispute, satisfy all sides, and keep his party together? His personality and background ill-prepared him for this challenge, for Buchanan was a cautious man with little imagination who had long depended on party loyalty and evasive language to climb the political ladder. Fond of the fine points of law, he could never understand why anyone would quarrel with the fairness or justice of something that was technically legal. He longed to take slavery out of politics, but clung to dogmas like popular sovereignty that had brought on “Bleeding Kansas” and made matters worse. As he took the oath of office, however, Buchannan could hope that the Supreme Court would resolve his dilemmas by deciding the case of *Dred Scott v. Sandford*. ### THE CASE OF DRED SCOTT Dred Scott was the slave of an army surgeon who had taken him to the free state of Illinois and also to the future state of Minnesota, then a part of the Wisconsin Territory that the Missouri Compromise had declared free soil. After some years, the surgeon brought Dred and his wife, Harriet, to St. Louis in the slave state of Missouri, where the couple sued for their liberty, claiming that residence in a free state and a free territory had made them free. They filed separate suits, but the courts focused on Dred’s case since one decision would cover both. Dred Scott lost in the courts of Missouri, but when he passed by inheritance to a man from New York, he gained a second trial in federal court because his suit now involved parties from two different states. There Scott lost again, but he appealed to the US Supreme Court in 1854. Distinguished attorneys represented both parties at two hearings in 1856. --- The case raised a tangle of legal issues that took the court a long time to decide. First, was Dred Scott a US citizen? If not, the decision to allow him a retrial had been wrong, because citizens alone could sue in federal court. Second, was Dred Scott a slave or a free man? He was certainly free by the laws of Illinois, but did he become a slave again when he moved to Missouri? Or did residence in the Wisconsin Territory make him free? Perhaps it did, but only if Congress had the constitutional right to adopt the Missouri Compromise, which had banned slavery from the part of the Wisconsin Territory where Scott had lived. Judging the constitutionality of the Missouri Compromise thrust the court into Democratic Party politics by forcing it to choose between two conflicting meanings of popular sovereignty. Southerners claimed that the Constitution protected bondage until a territory became a state, allowing it time to get established. By contrast, northerners assumed that Congress or a territorial legislature could protect free soil at once by excluding slavery in the early days of settlement. Which interpretation was correct? Northern and southern Democrats could both claim that popular sovereignty guarded their interests so long as this question stayed unanswered. Whatever the court decided, however, Democrats could no longer keep their party together by interpreting popular sovereignty differently in the North and South, so the last major political organization that spanned both sections might collapse. On the other hand, if North and South both accepted the court’s decision, the debate over slavery in the territories might end. The chief justice was 79-year-old Roger B. Taney, a Jackson appointee from Maryland. The four northern and five southern justices all wrote separate opinions, but Taney spoke for the majority on most issues. He first ruled that African Americans could never be US citizens, for in his words, when the Constitution was ratified, blacks were “regarded as beings of an inferior order . . . so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect.” Not being a citizen, Dred Scott could not sue in federal court. He might be free in Illinois, but he lived in Missouri and remained a slave by its law. Living in Wisconsin had not freed him either, Taney continued, because Congress had no right to ban slavery from the territories. The Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional because slaves were property, and according to the Fifth Amendment, Congress could not deprive persons of their property without due process of law. Republican commentators denounced the reasoning in *Dred Scott* and modern scholars agree. Taney’s denial of black citizenship was --- particularly faulty, since blacks had rights and even citizenship in many states, and the Constitution requires that "the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states." The *New York Tribune* gave the decision "just as much moral weight as would be the judgment of a majority of those congregated in any Washington bar-room." Other northern papers blasted Taney's "gross historical falsehoods," "wicked and false judgment," "atrocious doctrine," and "deliberate iniquity." Opponents fired back that "Southern opinion upon the subject of Southern slavery . . . is now the supreme law of the land." Most observers forgot about the Scotts, but St. Louis friends soon quietly purchased their freedom. The proslavery decision in *Dred Scott* seriously threatened popular sovereignty, and frightened Democrats who relied on the policy to win votes in both sections. If slavery were legal in all the territories, they reasoned, slaveholding settlers would gain early control and free-soil opponents would stand no chance. This prospect pleased southerners, but unless Democrats could offer northern voters some practical way to avoid it, they would turn en masse to the Republicans. By contrast, Republicans worried about freedom in the states. If the Fifth Amendment protected slavery in the territories, did it do the same throughout the North? Republican orator Abraham Lincoln thought it might. "A house divided against itself cannot stand," he warned, and "this government cannot endure, permanently half *slave* and half *free*." Lincoln denied the government's power to interfere with slavery where it already existed, but to keep it from overrunning the nation, Americans must vote Republican, reverse *Dred Scott*, and stop the spread of slavery to put it "in the course of ultimate extinction." Between the views of Lincoln and the southern supporters of *Dred Scott*, Democrats like Douglas had less and less room to maneuver. ### BACK TO KANSAS The *Dred Scott* decision did not affect Kansas, where proslavery forces were already in charge. In the waning days of the Pierce administration, its territorial legislature had called for a constitutional convention under the same proslavery officials who had stolen the last election. Knowing that news of more fraud would drive more northern voters to the Republicans, Buchanan appointed a new governor, Robert J. Walker of Mississippi, and told him to ensure a fair election. Disbelieving Walker's assurances, free-soilers refused to participate, --- so proslavery voters—only one out of five in the electorate—chose an equally proslavery convention. Gathering in the town of Lecompton, Kansas, the convention prepared a state constitution that described slave property as “inviolable” and forbade any constitutional amendments for seven years. Determined to adopt this document, the convention refused to submit its whole text to the voters but only allowed them to choose between two clauses on slavery. One permitted slavery without restrictions, and the other retained the 200 slaves already in Kansas plus their descendants and (free-soilers charged) any other slaves who slipped in later. Critics scoffed that either clause would put slavery in Kansas indefinitely. Republicans and many northern Democrats denounced this outcome as a farce. Genuine popular sovereignty required a free and fair choice between slavery and freedom, which the Lecompton constitution denied. Southerners demanded its approval, however, and James Buchanan knew where his political support came from. Early in 1858, he submitted the Lecompton constitution to Congress and forced Democrats to choose between their northern and southern supporters. Stephen A. Douglas professed not to care if Kansas became a slave state so long as it did so fairly, but he slammed the Lecompton constitution as a “flagrant violation of popular rights.” Southerners spoke just as fiercely in favor of Lecompton. The proposed constitution was perfectly legal, they claimed, and disapproving its contents was no grounds for rejection. > “If Kansas is *driven out of the Union for being a Slave State,*” thundered Senator James Henry Hammond of South Carolina, “can any Slave State remain in it with honor?” Furious congressmen armed themselves, and at one point, 50 joined a brawl on the floor of the House. After months of argument, the House of Representatives finally rejected the Lecompton constitution, 120 to 112. When they got the chance, Kansas voters did the same and joined the Union as a free state in the early months of the Civil War. ### THE FAILURE OF DISTRACTIONS Like Martin Van Buren before him, James Buchanan could not unify his party or the nation without a program to combine “the planters of the South and the plain Republicans of the north.” Also like Van Buren and the Jacksonians, he did not need consensus so much as a public disagreement about something more urgent than slavery, for it was rival visions of the public good that mobilized voters most effectively. --- During the Second Party System, the debate over economic development had distracted Americans from slavery by offering a clear choice between rival visions of the public good. With economic questions apparently settled, however, few rivalries seemed more compelling than the contest between freedom and slavery. Buchanan’s dilemma as president and party leader was to find a safe subject for political disagreement when the slavery issue entered into every other public discussion. Buchanan’s best hope for redirecting politics came with a financial collapse in 1857. The US economy had enjoyed booming prosperity for most of the 1850s, fed by bountiful shipments of California gold and the outbreak of the Crimean War, which cut Europe’s production and fed its demand for American products. American banks doubled in number and tripled in size, while factories and railroads grew proportionately. Industrial expansion was concentrated in the North, but banks and railroads spread into the South as well and planters reveled in high prices for cotton, land, and slaves. By 1857, however, the prices of stocks and commodities had risen too far. The sudden bankruptcy of a single large trading company sparked a wave of concern and sent depositors racing to withdraw their funds from banks. Faced with panic, banks froze credit and suspended specie payments, sending the economy into recession. The most immediate effect of the Panic of 1857 was a wave of repentance that swept through northern cities, prompting sober businessmen to wonder aloud why they had abandoned themselves to the spirit of greed. Bells tolled and thousands turned out for midday prayer meetings at downtown churches. For the first time since the Second Great Awakening, a major religious revival brought waves of urban clerks and businessmen to conversion. Participants were possibly influenced by the nation’s political troubles as well as the panic, though party leaders who tried to turn the recession to political advantage found that every argument they raised turned relentlessly back to slavery. Jacksonian Democrats had drawn their greatest energies from attacks on banking and financial speculation, but these targets could not rally the party in 1857. The seductive prosperity of the previous decade had won Democratic votes for bank bills and railroad charters in every legislature, and campaigners could not attack the institutions their own party had founded. Recent Congresses had also cut tariffs, so Republicans blamed the recession on Democratic policies of free --- trade. Northern workingmen should save their jobs, they argued, by voting for Republicans and the old Whig doctrine of protectionism. Republican demands for higher tariffs squarely collided with southern Democrats’ longtime resistance. Instead of treating the issue as a simple conflict between industrial and agrarian interests, however, Republicans could now argue that submission to the Slave Power had blinded northern Democrats to the needs of their constituents. Republicans and Democrats also collided over the use of western land grants to stimulate railroad construction, finance education, and provide new farms for would-be pioneers. Such measures to revive prosperity brought almost unanimous support from northern congressmen, but died because southerners thought that cheap western land would reduce federal revenue and create pressure for high tariffs. When a bill to grant federal lands in support of public colleges finally reached Buchanan’s desk, the president bowed to southern pressure and vetoed it. Instead of convincing voters that a greedy Money Power was attempting to exploit Americans by monopolizing their lands, as Andrew Jackson might have done, President Buchanan could only splutter helplessly when Republicans charged that a selfish Slave Power had denied relief to suffering whites. Democrats had also won past victories calling for territorial expansion, and nationalist Democrats had long hoped to continue this tradition by annexing Cuba and other parts of Latin America. Before becoming president, Buchanan had served the Pierce administration as minister to Britain, and contributed to designs against Cuba by joining in 1854 with other US and European diplomats in the Belgian port of Ostend to draft a proposal for buying Cuba or seizing it from Spain. When it became public, Republicans denounced the “Ostend Manifesto” and continued to work against annexation efforts, well knowing that the greatest of all sugar colonies could only join the Union as a slave state. Undaunted, proslavery adventurers known as “filibusters” launched ambitious but unsuccessful attacks on Cuba, Nicaragua, and Yucatan, confident that a private conquest would bring quick annexation of more slave territory. Like Whigs before them, Republicans deplored such efforts as unprovoked aggression against weaker people, inspired by the lust for more plantations. Like debating the economy, politicians of the 1850s found that the issue of territorial expansion only brought more recriminations over slavery. After secession, the dream of a southern empire in the Caribbean would continue to tantalize the Confederacy. --- # Disunion Approaches As the Third Party System tensely took shape, Republicans and Democrats vied for power in the North while Democrats ruled most of the South. Aside from the exceptional decade that followed the Civil War, this overall pattern survived until the 1960s. The new political structures did not bring sectional peace, however, since Republicans and southern Democrats had much to gain and nothing to lose by attacking each other. Democrats were the last major party with significant support in both regions, but each sectional faction wanted policies on slavery that the other found intolerable. Northern and southern figures vilified each other, and their arguments turned to violence when a band of abolitionists tried to start a slave revolt by attacking a federal arsenal. When Republican Abraham Lincoln won the presidential election of 1860, seven southern states felt compelled to leave the Union. ### RIVAL SECTIONAL VISIONS Americans of the late 1850s wrote and spoke increasingly as if the slavery question had remade them into separate societies, each grossly inferior to the other. These were the years when Virginian George Fitzhugh suggested that white and black workers should both be enslaved, and South Carolina senator James Henry Hammond lumped free workers with slaves as the “mud-sill of society.” An Alabama newspaper took the idea further. “Free society!” its editor snorted. “We sicken at the name. What is it but a conglomeration of greasy mechanics, filthy operatives, small-fisted farmers, and moon-struck theorists? All the northern, and especially the New England states, are devoid of society fitted for well-bred gentlemen.” For him, the yeoman farmers championed by Thomas Jefferson were “small farmers who do their own drudgery, and yet are hardly fit for association with a southern gentleman’s body servant.” The *Richmond Examiner* agreed. “We have got to hating every thing with the prefix free,” it growled in 1856, “from free negroes, down and up: through the whole catalogue. Free farms, free labor, free society, free will, free thinking, free children, and free schools, all belong to the same brood of damnable *isms.*” Republicans were especially delighted when their fundamental critique of slave society appeared in the writings of a white southerner. Hinton Rowan Helper was the son of a yeoman farmer in Piedmont North Carolina who published *The Impending Crisis of the South: How* --- to Meet It in 1857. Helper used statistics from the 1850 census to show that the North outstripped the South in every measure of wealth and culture, and blamed slavery for the yeomanry’s plight. “In the South,” he wrote, “no kind of labor is either free or respectable. Every white man who is under the necessity of earning his bread by the