Midwest that were largely settled by white southerners. When he could, Lincoln tried to soothe his critics by calling the war a conservative battle for the Union. When that failed, he cited his constitutional powers during wartime, suspended the writ of habeas corpus, and imprisoned Copperheads and southern sympathizers without trial when he feared they could help the Confederacy. In the most notorious case, Democratic congressman Clement Vallandigham ran for governor of Ohio from his jail cell after he condemned “a war for the freedom of the blacks and the enslavement of the whites.” Dismissing sticklers for civil liberties, Lincoln asked, “Must a government of necessity be too *strong* for the liberties of its own people, or too *weak* to maintain its own existence?” Political dissent could lead to irregular fighting beyond the paths of marching armies. Violence broke out in Missouri as early as May 1861, as both sides in a divided populace battled to rule the state. When Union troops shot 28 pro-southern rioters in St. Louis, southern sympathizers began to “bushwhack,” or ambush, their rural counterparts. --- As terrified victims fled to neighboring Kansas, armed Kansans known as “jayhawkers” surged into Missouri to defend their fellow unionists and exact revenge for proslavery attacks in the recent era of “Bleeding Kansas.” Control of the strategic juncture of the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers hung in the balance as irregular fighters traded midnight raids, murders, and robberies. Some marauders abandoned all military or political objectives for simple plunder. One such band of pro-Confederate raiders in Missouri gave rise to Jesse James’s legendary outlaw gang at war’s end. Union forces finally gained the upper hand, but not before southern sympathizers in both Missouri and Kentucky formed alternate governments that claimed to join the Confederacy. Serious violence also erupted in New York City between July 13 and 17, 1863, as the recently passed conscription act went into effect. With Irish roots and strong Democratic sympathies, the city’s white poor seethed when Republicans prepared to draft their youth to fight slavery, especially when wealthy men could buy an exemption for $300. When officials began to draw names, workers struck to halt conscription and punish its advocates. Draft offices, African American homes and businesses, Republican newspaper offices, Protestant churches, and the New York Colored Orphans Asylum all went up in flames. Mobs beat and lynched blacks and attacked abolitionists, Republicans, and those they suspected of buying exemptions. Violence raged for four days until battle-tested regiments rushed from the recent Union victory at Gettysburg to reclaim the nation’s largest city. Total casualties amounted to 119 killed and 300 wounded, putting the New York draft riots among the worst incidents of civil unrest in US history. ### THE CONTRABANDS MOVE Despite such opposition, African Americans had always seen the Civil War as an opportunity for freedom. Frederick Douglass voiced their hopes as early as the summer of 1861. “Freedom to the slave should now be proclaimed from the Capitol,” he wrote. *“The simple way . . . to put an end to the savage and desolating war now waged by the slaveholders, is to strike down slavery itself, the primal cause of that war.”* White abolitionists heartily agreed. Even if the North did not realize it, William Lloyd Garrison insisted, “this is fundamentally a struggle between all the elements of freedom on the one hand, and all the elements of despotism on the other.” Reversing his previous denuncia- --- tion of the Constitution as a “covenant with death and an agreement with hell,” Garrison proclaimed, “I am now with the Government, to enable it to constitutionally stop the further ravages of death, and to extinguish the flames of hell forever.” As early as May 1861, General Benjamin Butler of Fortress Monroe, Virginia, found legal grounds to protect fugitives like John Boston. While not technically free, he decided, they were “contraband of war,” or useful enemy property he could confiscate. Butler paid the “contrabands” for their labor, and Congress soon endorsed his policy with the First Confiscation Act, permitting the seizure of all property used for rebellion, including slaves. Word spread, and thousands of men, women, and children fled to the Union Army wherever it went. As their numbers climbed, the Union gained valuable helpers while Confederates lost them, and border state masters raged helplessly as the cultural and psychological underpinnings of enslavement disintegrated. Building on that development, some Union commanders pushed beyond the contraband formula. As early as August 1861, General John C. Frémont proclaimed freedom to the slaves of Missouri’s rebels, and in May 1862, General David Hunter did the same for slaves in Georgia, Florida, and South Carolina. Lincoln overruled both generals and reserved that decision for himself. Though blacks had served in every American war, law and custom opposed their use as soldiers. The surge of contrabands coincided with mounting Union casualties, however, and soon led whites to call for black enlistments. “Let the slaves and [free] colored people be called into service,” Frederick Douglass had proposed early on, “and formed into a liberating army to march into the South and raise the banner of Emancipation among the slaves.” Other advocates were less high-minded and crudely preferred blacks over whites as cannon fodder. Without waiting for explicit federal permission, black regiments formed in individual states such as Kansas, Massachusetts, and occupied Louisiana in the fall of 1862, as pressure mounted for unlimited black enlistment and moves against slavery itself. ### PROCLAIMING EMANCIPATION Lincoln’s initial reluctance to emancipate had stemmed from his respect for the Constitution and his fear of alienating the border states. He also thought slavery would disappear peacefully and legally if it could not expand and the Union endured. In the first half of 1862, how- --- ever, the contrabands’ service to the Union Army and white calls for black enlistment convinced him that law and public opinion would support a sweeping blow against slavery on military grounds. Armies had a well-known right to the enemy’s fighting resources, so a wartime commander in chief held far more power over slavery than Congress or a peacetime president. In the spring and summer of 1862, Congress signaled its sympathy for emancipation by authorizing payments to loyal masters in the District of Columbia who freed their slaves voluntarily, and by the Second Confiscation Act, which freed the slaves of all those found to be “traitors.” Lincoln discussed his decision with the cabinet in mid-1862 but delayed his announcement until a convincing Union victory gave him a position of strength. In the meantime, he released an enigmatic letter to Horace Greeley, Republican editor of the *New York Tribune*. “If I could save the Union without freeing *any* slave I would do it,” he insisted, “and if I could save it by freeing *all* the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that. What I do about slavery, and the colored race, I do because it helps to save the Union; and what I forbear, I forbear because I do *not* believe it would help to save the Union.” The letter appeared indifferent to black freedom, but Lincoln had already chosen his course and prepared the way by presenting liberty as a path to victory. Antietam gave Lincoln the backdrop he wanted. Five days after the battle, he issued the Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation that promised freedom to the slaves in all parts of the South that were still rebelling on January 1, 1863. In effect, he offered the Confederacy a bargain: lay down your arms and save slavery, or keep fighting and lose it. At the same time, Lincoln endorsed black enlistment in the armed forces. Shortly afterward, he offered to pay the border states for releasing their slaves and colonizing them in South America. Confederate and border state leaders refused both bargains, so Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation on the following New Year’s Day. Then and later, Lincoln’s critics assailed the proclamation as too little, too late, too empty. It made no moral case for freedom and reduced emancipation to mere confiscation. It spared large parts of Louisiana, Tennessee, and eastern Virginia by only applying to unoccupied territory. Lincoln “has proclaimed emancipation only where he has notoriously no power to execute it,” scoffed the *New York World*. “The exemption . . . renders the proclamation not merely futile but ridiculous.” The editor scored a point but missed deeper truth. The --- Emancipation Proclamation transformed the moral dynamics of the war and the Union itself by launching a crusade for freedom. In its aftermath, every Union advance broke more chains and dealt another blow to the war’s essential cause. By permitting black enlistment, moreover, it opened the armed forces to almost 200,000 black recruits who proved their worth to doubters and laid a claim to broader rights thereafter. Recognizing the proclamation’s shortcomings, Congress adopted the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution in 1865, banning slavery everywhere in the United States, and sent it to the states for ratification. In the proclamation’s wake, recruits streamed into all-black regiments led by white officers. One of the most outstanding was the 54th Massachusetts Volunteers, led by white abolitionist and Boston blueblood Colonel Robert Gould Shaw. In July 1863, the 54th Massachusetts led the assault on Charleston’s heavily defended Fort Wagner, and held its outer walls for about an hour before Shaw and half his men had died. Their sacrifice proved beyond question that black men could fight courageously and effectively. African American soldiers still faced hostility in uniform. Black soldiers earned less than whites at first, could not become officers, and often toiled in subordinate roles. Confederates might re-enslave or execute them if captured, and their officers faced trial for inciting insurrection. When the Confederacy refused to treat captured black soldiers as prisoners of war, and sold them into slavery or even executed them as rebellious slaves, the North halted prisoner exchanges and a huge prison population was generated on both sides. The South’s inability to feed and shelter its captives brought mass starvation and disease, especially at the notorious stockade in Andersonville, Georgia. After the war, Andersonville commander Captain Henry Wirz was the only ex-Confederate tried and hanged for war crimes by the victorious Union. # The Home Fires Burning The Civil War had a massive impact on both home fronts. It did not transform the northern economy by itself, but mobilization fed changes that had started already. Freed from the objections of states’ rights purists, Republicans enacted key policies from the old Whig Party. From a less developed starting point, the Confederacy forged new industries and a powerful central government while struggling --- with deprivation and painful social change. War exposed the fissures in slaveholding society and sparked explosive protests. ## THE ECONOMY OF VICTORY Federal revenue totaled $41 million in 1861, but the North eventually spent that much on the war every ten days. It began the fight with a Jacksonian financial system, no national bank, no standardized currency, and almost no income but land sales and customs duties. The government paid its own debts in gold and silver, but citizens relied on paper currency from 1,600 state banks of wildly differing dependability. Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase set to work by selling bonds to large and small investors alike. When this was not enough, the government imposed a land tax, higher excise taxes, and America’s first income tax. With lasting repercussions, Congress authorized $450 million in unsupported greenbacks, or paper money, and made them legal tender, or acceptable for all debts. Leaving gold and silver was a radical departure from Jacksonian traditions, justified only by wartime emergency. Chase next proposed a national banking system to establish a uniform currency, market government bonds, and secure public debt. Avoiding the monopoly features of the old Bank of the United States, the National Bank Acts of 1863 and 1864 offered a national charter, with authority to issue federal notes and receive federal deposits, to any bank that invested a third of its assets in government securities and accepted regulation of its capital reserves. Going further, the Bank Act of 1865 ended a major source of economic instability by imposing a 10 percent tax on state banknotes that effectively stopped the use of private paper money. Wall Street objected at first, but eventually embraced the more secure and uniform currency of the national banks. Republicans adopted many old Whig policies when states’ rights Democrats seceded. “Government need not be and should not be an institution of purely negative, repressive usefulness and value,” Horace Greeley exulted, “but . . . it should exert a beneficent, paternal, fostering influence upon the Industry and Prosperity of the People.” In 1861, the Morrill Tariff Act raised import duties and made tariff protection a banner Republican policy until far into the twentieth century. The following year, Congress revived the idea of using public lands for internal improvements by promising generous loans and land grants to --- the Central Pacific and Union Pacific Railroads to finance their transcontinental railroad. Stephen A. Douglas had introduced his Kansas-Nebraska Act in part to support this project, but sectional tension unleashed by the law made route selection impossible. Under the new plan, the Union Pacific built westward from Omaha as the Central Pacific built eastward from Sacramento on a course that gave them the right-of-way and every other section of public land along its entire extent. The two lines joined in 1867 and opened the West to a dramatic new era of development. Other railroads quickly demanded equivalent favors, and Congress eventually gave them 94 million acres in the next decade. Later critics condemned these subsidies as massive giveaways to private interests, but Civil War Republicans thought them essential to national progress. Senator Justin Morrill, Republican of Vermont, not only gave his name to the new tariff law but also sponsored the 1862 Morrill College Land Grant Act, which gave western lands to support state colleges of agriculture and engineering. That same year, the Homestead Act offered 160 acres of free public land to every pioneer who would occupy and till it, though many plots were too dry, remote, or infertile for effective cultivation. By 1900, some 600,000 homesteaders had received the government’s bounty. In the short run, war’s death and destruction slowed the growth of the North’s economy. Even so, government expenditures stimulated sizable growth in specific industries like railroads, iron, and steel, and laid a foundation for more growth later. Responding to military needs, the largest railroad companies coordinated their operations, standardized their tracks, and replaced iron rails with more durable steel. The results brought dividends to stockholders that exceeded $100 million in the last three years of the war. Military contracts for iron, steel, food, clothing, shoes, and oil enriched manufacturers and launched the careers of future industrial giants like Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller. Some northern factories had hundreds of employees, but small workshops with no more than a dozen hands produced most manufactures. Few of these workers belonged to labor unions, despite the strenuous efforts of a handful of organizers, and their dreams of personal advancement proved elusive. Despite prevailing praise for free labor, the *New York Times* likened wage earners to slaves, and observed that “the capitalists or masters are becoming fewer and stronger and richer . . . [and] the laborers or slaves are becoming more numerous --- or weaker and poorer." Squeezed by wartime inflation and the looming military draft, some skilled workers struck successfully for higher wages. Others, like the 30,000 seamstresses of New York City, could toil as long as 14 hours a day for no more than $1.00 to $3.00 a week. Despite these hardships, plentiful job opportunities kept immigration high throughout the war. Despite the antiwar sentiment of some immigrants, moreover, many newcomers joined all-Irish or all-German regiments to fight bravely in the Union cause. Beyond cities and factories, northerners of every rank and condition threw themselves into the war effort. Women everywhere took up the challenge of knitting and sewing for the troops, and struggled to manage farms and businesses in the absence of soldier husbands. Others stepped forward as military nurses, expanding the sphere of domesticity to the tending of the sick and dying. One of these was Clara Barton, a former teacher and government clerk who began to serve the wounded by collecting medical supplies, went on the operate field hospitals, and later founded the American Red Cross. The North’s greater population allowed many farmers to remain in their fields to produce bumper crops of corn, wheat, and hogs to feed the army. The growing use of farm machinery like the new McCormick reaper increased their productivity. ### THE CONFEDERATE HOME FRONT Despite its fund of military experience, total war stressed the Confederacy far more than the Union. The South lacked weapons factories, and its railroads were both shorter and less interconnected than the North’s. The Union’s sophisticated financial system, already centered on New York’s Wall Street, boasted twelve times the capital of southern banks. Perhaps most seriously, the South’s public culture of states’ rights and flamboyant individualism undercut moves toward stricter discipline and uniform effort. The Confederacy made impressive progress in mobilization but its efforts finally fell short, so the war that stimulated the northern economy would leave the South in poverty and ruin. Confederate state and national governments bought as many as 600,000 weapons in Europe before the Union perfected its blockade. Under the leadership of Brigadier General Josiah Gorgas, the Ordnance Bureau created numerous government-owned factories and armories to make rifles, gunpowder, cannons, and other weapons. --- As a result, Confederate soldiers never lacked sufficient arms, though food, clothing, blankets, shoes, and tents might be scarce or nonexistent. "When I say that they were hungry," a Virginia woman remembered about Lee’s passing troops, "I convey no impression of the gaunt starvation that looked from their cavernous eyes. All day long they crowded to the doors of our houses, always with the same drawling complaint: ‘I’ve been a-marchin’ and a-fightin’ for six weeks stiddy, and I ain’t had n-a-r-thin’ to eat ’cept green apples an’ green cawn, an’ I wish you’d please to gimme a bite to eat.’ ... That they could march or fight at all seemed incredible." By contrast, Union supplies were so plentiful that rushing soldiers freely discarded them. Since many prewar southerners had raised their own food, tillage suffered when farmers entered the army, and poor facilities hindered transportation and distribution of the harvest. Financial failures brought other shortages. Like the Union, the Confederacy borrowed from its citizens, but a low-cash farm economy left them little to lend. The Confederacy did not make its paper money legal tender, but issued so much of it that inflation reached 700 percent by January 1863. Respectful of states’ rights, the government hesitated to impose high taxes or collect them with a strict and efficient bureaucracy. When taxes did come, the Confederacy refused its own currency and levied a tax in kind that took one-tenth of all farm products. Confederate forces also had the power to seize, or impress, civilian property—including slaves—whenever needed, offering written promises of postwar compensation in exchange. As defeat loomed ever closer, the inadequacy of these promises grew harder and harder to ignore. Economic problems fell heaviest on the poor, whose wages lagged while the cost of daily necessities soared, many women lacked cash incomes, and soldiers’ pay stagnated. Suffering was greatest in towns without food supplies and in nonslaveholding areas where blacks were not available to replace absent farmers. Beginning in 1863, resentment boiled over in a series of urban food riots, one in Richmond itself. Often led by axe-wielding women, protesters demanded that merchants sell flour, salt, and other necessities at affordable rates instead of waiting for higher prices. Worried that civilian suffering could undermine the war effort, state and local governments struggled to find charity for soldiers’ families, but with little success. White men’s military service left Confederate women with heavy responsibilities. Before the war, southern law and custom made the male head of each household the ruler and protector of all the women, children, and slaves within it. Privileged women had gloried in the title --- of "lady" and traded any potential claim to independence for support, protection, refinement, and exemption from physical labor. The war revoked this bargain and forced white women to operate farms and businesses in addition to caring for children and homes. Slave-owning women had to supervise their human property, and many quailed at a task that always implied violence. "Where there are so many negroes upon places as upon ours," one Alabama mistress wrote, "it is quite necessary that there should be men who can and will control them, especially at this time." "I shall not farm myself," worried another. "I cannot get along with negro men." Even so, southern white women threw themselves into service, knitting and sewing for the troops and struggling to revive the nearly vanished arts of spinning and weaving by hand. Cajoling and threatening their slaves or joining their children and old men in the fields, they did their best to feed their households and the army. As the Union blockade tightened, they gave up imports and accepted deprivation with a mixture of resentment, zeal, and resignation. "Everyone is kept in such anxiety of mind by this dreadful war,"