money they spent on stock. Called limited liability, this privilege made it much safer for strangers to invest in new enterprises. Many of the earliest corporations were mixed enterprises, jointly owned and paid for by governments and private investors. Initially, legislatures only granted charters for significant public services like building roads, supplying water, or even creating banks, but corporations eventually dominated manufacturing as well. Internal improvements could bring great economic benefits, but they were also quite expensive. The Erie Canal cost about $7 million in 1825; competing projects were at least as costly and not nearly so profitable. Even the largest private fortunes could not furnish such sums, especially considering the serious risks involved, so promoters depended on government help. New York paid the entire cost of the Erie Canal with state bonds, while the state of Pennsylvania spent some $65 million on public works before 1860. In 1841, Indiana nearly went bankrupt after sinking $9 million in unprofitable transportation companies. Illinois collapsed the next year. Throughout the era, Americans spent some $200 million in canals, about two-thirds of it from state governments. The federal government also bought stock in companies like the Chesapeake & Delaware Canal on the East Coast and lavished land grants on others, including the Midwest’s Wabash & Erie and Illinois & Michigan Canals. Despite the power of individualist rhetoric, economic development in America depended heavily on the government. --- The federal government played another indispensable role by developing an effective post office. The colonial postal service had been a moneymaking operation for the colonial government that mostly carried the transatlantic correspondence of seaboard merchants. The Post Office Act of 1792 abandoned the goal of raising revenue and refigured the mail as a crucial means of information for business and self-government. The new law established very low rates for newspapers and allowed printers to exchange newspapers with each other for free. Congress soon insisted on scattering post offices widely to facilitate communication with constituents, and increased their number from 75 in 1790 to over 3,000 in 1816 and nearly ten times that many in 1860. Free exchanges enabled local papers to reprint news from the farthest parts of the Union, while cheap postage and widespread post offices allowed ordinary subscribers to receive the news directly from faraway places. As a result, newspapers took up most of the mail, followed by commercial circulars and correspondence. Since congressmen could send mail free, they sent a steady stream of printed speeches, reports, and newsletters to their home districts. The new system thus created a broad forum for public conversation and debate and permitted national campaigns for public office, social reform, religious conversion, and other causes. It also created a dense network of business communications that aided enterprise throughout the country, as interior trade overtook Atlantic commerce at the center of economic activity. Most customers continued to pick up their mail at the local post office, but some offices offered home delivery for an extra fee, and private services did the same in some cities. Midcentury rate cuts finally made personal letters affordable for ordinary Americans, allowing them to keep in touch with migrating friends and family members and raising the volume of personal letters from 300,000 in 1790 to 3 million in 1856. Along the way, the Post Office used its power over mail routes to subsidize stagecoach companies and create a national network for overland transportation. Far larger than any private business, the Post Office operated with a vast bureaucracy, and succeeded remarkably well. ### MONEY AND BANKING Banks had a special place in the developing economy. To remedy wartime financial problems, Congress swallowed its constitutional doubts and chartered a second Bank of the United States as a mixed corpo- --- ration in 1816, providing one-fifth of its $35 million in capital. As the nation’s largest bank, the Bank of the United States made private loans and held the government’s money interest-free. It could not meet all credit needs, however, so states also chartered banks, ranging from large and conservatively managed institutions in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia, to small and highly unreliable wildcat banks in frontier villages. The number of American banks rose steeply, from none at the end of the Revolution, to 208 in 1815, and to 1,562 in 1860. Once chartered, a bank was supposed to sell stock for specie, and then start making loans in the form of paper notes bearing promises to pay a given amount of gold or silver on demand. These notes passed from hand to hand throughout the country to provide a currency for the rapidly growing economy. The value of banknotes depended on the issuing bank’s ability to keep its promise and exchange them for specie, and those of the national bank were the most dependable. The federal mint issued some gold and silver coins but no paper currency, so legally privileged corporations issued most of the country’s cash. Under the assumption that customers would never try to redeem all their notes at once, even the best banks loaned more paper than the specie in their vaults, handsomely multiplying the interest they collected. Some banks held no specie at all, either from fraud or because they had sold their stock on credit. Low specie reserves endangered banks when business instability made coins more trustworthy than paper. Unfortunately, instability is intrinsic to capitalism, because producers in good times eventually make more things than consumers can buy, leading to oversupplies of goods, a sudden collapse of prices, and a preference for specie and other enduring assets. When this happened, banks could not satisfy everyone who suddenly wanted metal instead of paper, so they suspended specie payments and refused to honor the promises on their notes. Business confidence then collapsed, notes lost much of their value, prices plummeted, individuals and businesses could no longer pay their debts, bankruptcies multiplied, workers lost their jobs, and loans became nearly unobtainable. After a long spell of “hard times,” confidence slowly returned and business conditions improved again. Nineteenth-century Americans called these episodes panics, and they were equivalent to modern recessions or depressions. Occasional recessions were (and are) inevitable, but the Market Revolution broadened their impact. A widespread suspension of specie payments had gripped the country during the War of 1812, and severe panics hit the country in --- 1819, 1837, 1839, and 1857. While the new economy promised greater prosperity, it also exposed Americans to more insecurity than before. ## JUDICIAL SUPPORT Chief Justice Marshall’s claims of broad federal power supported the creation of a stable, nationwide marketplace. *Fletcher v. Peck* was an important early case that arose when the Georgia legislature tried to annul a public land sale resulting from massive bribery. Speaking for a unanimous court, Marshall decided in 1810 that the fraudulent sale remained valid because it was a contract, and the Constitution barred states from “impairing the Obligation of Contracts.” This was the first time the Supreme Court ruled a state law unconstitutional. A supporting decision came in 1819, when the court blocked a New Hampshire takeover of Dartmouth College because its charter was also an inviolable contract. Both rulings gave invaluable support to the sanctity of business agreements, while the Dartmouth College case protected private corporations from government interference. An especially crucial decision involved the Second Bank of the United States. In 1818, Maryland tried to privilege its state banks by imposing a stiff tax on the rival Baltimore branch of the national bank. Bank officer James McCulloch insisted that the state had no right to tax a federal institution, and refused to pay. Maryland replied that the Bank of the United States should not even exist because the Constitution gave Congress no explicit authority to create a bank. In *McCulloch v. Maryland* (1819), Marshall ruled for a unanimous court that the national bank was indeed constitutional. Though the Constitution did not mention banking, he reasoned that the Framers could not have listed every subject that might need legislation, so the Constitution permitted actions that were “necessary and proper” to exercise the powers it did list. Since a national bank seemed “necessary and proper” for national finance, Marshall continued, the national bank was constitutional and protected from the states. In 1824, the court reaffirmed this decision in *Osborne v. Bank of the United States*. Infuriating strict constructionists, Marshall affirmed the sweeping claims for implied federal power that Alexander Hamilton had used to defend the First Bank of the United States, and laid the groundwork for the wide authority of the modern federal government. The Supreme Court also asserted broad federal powers over interstate commerce, not only based on the wording of the Constitution --- but also on marketplace values favoring competition and innovation. A pivotal case involved a steamboat monopoly that New York granted to Robert Fulton and his backers. Fulton’s company sold Thomas Gibbons an exclusive license to operate a steam ferry to New Jersey, so when Aaron Ogden opened a competing line, Gibbons sued to stop him. In *Gibbons v. Ogden* (1824), Marshall reasoned that a principal purpose of the Constitution was “to benefit and improve” “the state of trade and commerce,” so it should not be interpreted to stifle progress. He therefore ruled that Fulton (and hence Gibbons, his licensee) had no legal monopoly at all because Congress—not New York—had exclusive authority over interstate commerce. A similar case arose in 1837, after Marshall’s death. The Charles River Bridge Company operated a toll bridge between Boston and Cambridge, Massachusetts, and tried to block a competing bridge by claiming that its earlier charter gave it a monopoly. Chief Justice Roger B. Taney rejected this claim and ruled for the new bridge, arguing that the Constitution should not block “those improvements which are now adding to the wealth and prosperity, and the convenience and comfort, of every other part of the civilized world.” In both cases, private interests wanted to preserve old legal monopolies regardless of the consequences, but the court used the public interest to rule otherwise. Instead of perpetuating obsolete rights, the outcomes of *Gibbons* and the Charles River Bridge case favored the process of creative destruction. # Markets and Production The new economy transformed how Americans worked and made things. Farmers changed their methods and grew different crops for new markets. Local artisans lost work to distant businesses and left self-employment for wage labor. Like Lucy Larcom and Sarah Bagley, a few found work in early factories. New ways of working not only changed how things were made but transformed personal relationships and traditional ideas about dependence and independence. ### AGRICULTURAL IMPROVEMENTS Writing in 1794, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Tenche Coxe deplored the farming methods he observed in the middle states, reporting “innumerable instances of impoverished lands . . . ; a frequent inattention to the making or preserving of manure; as frequent inattention --- to the condition of the seed grain . . . ; the bad condition of *barns*, stables, and fences . . . ; [and] the neglect of household manufactures in many families.” Coxe fumed that *“farming . . . is too generally speaking, the least understood, or the least economically and attentively pursued, of any of the occupations which engage the citizens of the United States.”* As canals and turnpikes stretched out from coastal cities, rural families with too many children on too few acres began to pay more attention to voices like Coxe’s. When traditional methods became too unprofitable to protect their independence, farmers began manuring their fields and clearing wood lots to boost productivity. Europe’s Napoleonic Wars encouraged their efforts, as armies drafted peasants, crop yields sagged, and prices soared for grain, meat, butter, leather, and other farm products. American farmers with the necessary skills and capital could suddenly prosper more readily by selling their crops in foreign markets. Others could move west for more and better land, or leave their farms for urban employment. After peace returned in 1815, Europe’s farms recovered and its need for imports slackened, so commercializing farmers sought customers in America’s towns and cities. Instead of growing many things, they specialized in a few cash crops that gave them what economists call a comparative advantage over competitors. In the fertile Midwest, farmers turned wheat into flour to ship east on the Erie Canal or south on the Mississippi. Their corn fattened pigs for salted pork and gave Cincinnati the nickname “Porkopolis.” Unable to match the West in these staples, eastern farmers raised perishables like milk, cheese, butter, fruits, and vegetables for nearby city dwellers. They also turned their least productive fields into pastures to supply cities with beef and woolen mills with fleece. As inexpensive products became more available from urban workshops, farm women changed their own work. Along the Erie Canal, families gave up homespun for factory cloth. Farm women in the mid-Atlantic states sold butter and eggs in growing cities and turned these traditional female activities into major sources of family income. More and more rural families thus left the world of near-subsistence farming for the cash-dependent world of buying and selling. Commercializing farmers were constantly alert for improved methods and formed state agricultural societies to publicize every possibility. They imported superior breeds of livestock and penned the animals to control their breeding and collect their dung. They also adopted labor-saving technology. In 1837, Illinois blacksmith John Deere devel- --- oped a steel-tipped plow that easily broke the thick turf of midwestern prairies, and built an industrial empire based on farm tools. Other inventors came forward with new devices for planting seeds precisely, for mechanical cultivators to replace the handheld hoe, and a cradle scythe for harvesting wheat more easily. An especially dramatic invention appeared in 1831, when young Cyrus McCormick built on his father’s ideas to perfect a horse-drawn device for harvesting wheat. His first machines cut as many as 10 to 12 acres a day, but worked best on the broad, flat fields of the Midwest. Moving to Chicago from Virginia, McCormick sold 1,000 machines a year by 1851. Speed allowed farmers to gather more wheat before it spoiled, leading them to plant more and increase production. One of McCormick’s rivals created the first combine, or machine that reaped and threshed in a single process, but his invention was not perfected until after the Civil War. Many farmers welcomed the shift to a cash economy. In 1852, the president of the New York Agricultural Society rejoiced that old-fashioned practices like barter and sharing chores were disappearing, and boasted that the up-to-date farmer “now sells for money, and it is his interest to buy for money, every article that he cannot produce cheaper than he can buy. . . . His farm does not merely afford him a subsistence; it produces capital, and therefore demands the expenditure for its improvement.” By implication, farmers with capital would edge out those without it. Mindful of such trade-offs, others expressed their doubts. The same year, one New Englander told a patent office investigator that “as a general rule . . . it is better that the farmer should produce what he needs for home consumption. . . . He may obtain more money from tobacco, hops or broom corn, than from breadstuffs, but taking all things into consideration will he be better off?” This cautious Yankee knew that if a farmer experimented with some highly specialized crop, a sudden panic might slash the value of his harvest and take his farm when he could not pay his debts. The same circumstances could take a farmhand’s job or evict a tenant. In good times, farmers’ incomes rose under the new system, but their need for capital and their vulnerability to economic downturns had grown. ## FROM ARTISANS TO OPERATIVES Manufacturing changed even more than agriculture. In colonial times, Americans had imported fine manufactures from England, but local artisans made everyday items, and these blacksmiths, tailors, carpen- --- ters, and others were vital members of the household economy. Their livelihoods had depended on slow, expensive transportation, however, for lower shipping charges exposed them to distant competition. The creative destruction brought by more efficient transport and machinery put many craftsmen out of business, blocked journeymen’s rise to shop ownership, turned masters back into wage earners, and eventually ended the artisans’ world. The change not only damaged their personal status but raised enduring questions of public concern, for republican ideology viewed the class of self-employed artisans—urban yeomen, in a sense—as essential to good government and a good society. The decline of the artisanal economy began with simple articles like shoes. Traditionally, cordwainers made each pair of shoes by hand for a specific customer. Beginning in the late eighteenth century, enterprising merchants in Lynn, Massachusetts, and other nearby towns began to consolidate shoemaking by paying local families to make dozens of pairs at a time, especially in winter months when farm chores were fewer. To improve speed and cut costs, they applied a principle called division of labor to split shoemaking into a series of very simple tasks, like stitching the upper pieces together or binding them to the sole. Then they paid a few highly skilled artisans to cut out large quantities of standardized shoe parts and “put out” these materials to the homes of less skilled workers, who performed a single step of assembly over and over before passing the unfinished shoes to another worker. Endless repetition increased workers’ speed but eroded their skills when no one made a whole shoe anymore. The outworkers, many of whom were women and children, also commanded lower wages than skilled shoemakers, but shoe production rose, prices fell, and merchants increased their shipments over roads and canals. As early as the 1820s, western pioneers and southern slaves donned cheap New England work boots, while formerly independent shoemakers had become poorly paid hands under constant pressure to work faster. When Elias Howe invented the sewing machine in 1845, Lynn manufacturers used it to replace hand stitching without altering their methods fundamentally. The division of labor could cheapen and simplify many tasks. Much like the merchants of Lynn, New York City businessmen employed highly skilled men to cut up cloth and put it out for women to assemble into ready-made shirts and trousers. For pennies a day, a seamstress might sew collar after collar in her own home, or a number of cloth- --- ing workers could toil furiously together in a tiny sweatshop. Sweated workers could also make hats, buttons, artificial flowers, simple furniture, and hundreds of other articles that could be assembled in a series of simple tasks. ## TEXTILE FACTORIES The textile industry was the first to move from "putting out" to true factories. The process began in England, where the invention of the spinning jenny enabled a single worker to make thread on six or seven spindles at once, and subsequent improvements increased this number rapidly. Inventors then developed a power loom that tapped the energy from a water wheel or steam engine to weave much faster than a handworker. These machines did not require great strength or skill to operate, so manufacturers employed unskilled women and children at lower pay than men. They created the first true factories by bringing workers and equipment into one building with a single power source and soon flooded world markets with inexpensive cottons and woolens. Britain banned the export of textile machinery to safeguard its monopoly, but an ambitious mechanic named Samuel Slater slipped away with the knowledge in his head. In 1790, Slater built America’s first water-powered spinning mill at Pawtucket, Rhode Island. Similar mills soon spread across southern New England, using the labor of surrounding farm families. Middlemen put out the finished yarn for local women to weave in their homes. When Jefferson’s embargo blocked Atlantic trade, New England merchants and shipowners moved their capital from commerce to manufacturing. Like Samuel Slater, Francis Cabot Lowell memorized English loom designs and gathered a group of partners called the Boston Associates to launch the Boston Manufacturing Company in 1813. Using waterpower to drive its machines, the company concentrated carding, spinning, and weaving in a single structure in Waltham, Massachusetts. Factories on the “Waltham plan” were very expensive to build, but they produced cloth more efficiently than the putting-out system. In following years, the Boston Associates put Waltham-style factories at the falls of the Merrimack River and built the surrounding town of Lowell to house their workers. Copying their success, textile factories spread rapidly to other waterpower sites throughout New England. --- Workers like Lucy Larcom and Sarah Bagley were unique features of New England factories. Managers stopped hiring local families and replaced them with young unmarried women from remote rural districts. These “mill girls” worked long hours amid choking dust, stifling heat, deafening noise, and tight supervision, marking time by the factory clock and whistle instead of the rhythms of nature. English factories and factory towns already had bad reputations for squalid living and working conditions, so American owners sought to head off such criticisms by requiring “mill girls” to attend church and live in strictly regulated boardinghouses like Mrs. Larcom’s. While their time and labor were no longer their own, factory wages gave many women the first cash they ever earned. “Sarah don’t I feel independent of everyone!” a New Hampshire farm girl rejoiced in a letter to her friend back home, after her second payday. “The thought that I am living on no one is a happy one indeed to me.” Most of the women hoped to work briefly to help a struggling family, educate a brother, or save money for marriage. In the meantime, despite harsh conditions, they somehow managed to conduct sewing circles, reading groups, and missionary societies, and also published a literary magazine, the *Lowell Offering*. Despite the fame of New England “mill girls,” their lives were still exceptional in antebellum America. Outside the textile industry, most of the early industrial workforce was male, and more women probably toiled as outworkers in rural homes and urban tenements than as factory workers.