inaugural address that the South was defending American rights of self-government. Confederates included slavery in those rights and firmly believed that white liberty required black bondage. Even the nonslaveholding majority could not imagine sharing freedom with nearly four million African Americans. As the guns in Charleston Harbor fell silent, therefore, white southerners also rushed forward to defend their vision of the republican experiment. Bands played, orators declaimed, crowds cheered, regiments formed, and beautiful girls presented silken banners as southerners rushed to what they too trusted would be a short and easy war. The Second Party System still survived in the nonseceding slave states. Unionist candidates had done well there in the recent elections, and the Constitutional Union Party had won in Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee. After Lincoln's victory, the Upper South's "conditional unionists" predicted that Republicans would be powerless and lose the next elections, so their states should "watch and wait" until he actually --- attacked slavery or attempted to coerce the Confederacy. Despite this moderate advice, secession sentiment had spread through the Upper South in the early months of 1861 as the crisis fed pressure for action. Lincoln’s proclamation swept indecision away. Crowds poured into the streets of Richmond, Raleigh, and Nashville, waving the Confederate flag and madly cheering southern victory. Governors spurned the call for troops and called for secession instead. With a state convention already assembled, Virginia set the pace with a secession ordinance on April 17. Official action by North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas took longer, but all acted as though they had seceded already. “The division must be made on the line of slavery,” declared former unionists from North Carolina. “The South must go with the South. . . . Blood is thicker than Water.” The four remaining slave states of Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri teetered on the brink of secession but ultimately held back. Leaving nothing to chance, Lincoln declared martial law in Maryland to protect the national capital. Slavery was limited or declining in all the border states and Republican views gained a hearing, though volunteers joined the armies of both sides. Union sentiment was so strong in western Virginia that most Appalachian counties left the Old Dominion to form the loyal state of West Virginia. Unionism also flourished among mountain whites in North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas, bringing bitter internal warfare to those regions. ## Fighting Begins The Union surpassed the Confederacy in most measures of military strength, but the South benefited from its defensive position, shorter supply lines, and abundant military talent. Geographic factors like the shape of the landscape, the South’s agricultural economy, and the location of the two sides’ capitals heavily affected the war’s conduct and inspired the Union’s early decision to seize the Mississippi and impose a naval blockade. Intangible factors like the quality of leadership also mattered enormously, as Lincoln discovered in a long struggle with his first general-in-chief, Major General George B. McClellan. ### RESOURCES FOR COMBAT The 23 northern states seemed to have overwhelming advantages as the war began, starting with 71 percent of the total US population of 31 million. Slaves made up 40 percent of the Confederate population; --- they could not bear arms but their labor freed whites for uniformed service. The Union also held 86 percent of the nation’s factories and 71 percent of its railroad mileage. Besides these advantages, the North also surpassed the South in food production and the number of essential work animals, and the Confederacy would eventually have much more trouble with scant food supplies than shortages of weaponry. The South had its own advantages. Operating defensively, the Confederacy did not need to conquer the North but only to survive until it gave up. The South possessed interior supply lines that quickly carried provisions and reinforcements from one region to another. Existing technology favored defenders, moreover, for newly accurate rifles gave entrenched troops the power to stop attackers before a charge could reach them. And southern soldiers had the psychological advantage of fighting on their own soil, for their own way of life. Southerners also benefited from plentiful military experience. Trained leadership came from southerners in the regular US forces and the graduates of state military academies. Many rural southerners were expert horsemen and marksmen already. Southern states had also kept their militias ready to counter slave revolts. Finally, military historians have traditionally credited Confederate generals Robert E. Lee, Thomas J. (“Stonewall”) Jackson, and J. E. B. Stuart with remarkable military talent, while Union forces searched long and hard before discovering comparable ability in men like Ulysses S. Grant and William T. Sherman. Lincoln’s initial call for 75,000 volunteers proved woefully inadequate. Using his authority as commander in chief, Lincoln expanded the regular army and navy in early May and called for 42,000 three-year volunteers. Congress eventually gave him permission to enlist as many as 700,000 men. Confederates bragged that one southerner could whip ten Yankees easily, but leaders knew that victory would take more than empty boasting. The Confederacy had already summoned an army of 100,000 before the attack on Fort Sumter, and added 400,000 more a month later. Both armies began with volunteers but turned to conscription when recruitment lagged. The Confederacy adopted America’s first general conscription law in the spring of 1862, drafting all able-bodied white men between the ages of 18 and 35. The ages of eligibility later stretched to 17 and 50. The law exempted key occupations and allowed draftees to hire substitutes. It also offered an exemption for every holding of 20 slaves or more. Supporters argued that slaves needed white male supervision, but nonslaveholders bitterly objected that the --- "twenty Negro law" made the struggle for independence "a rich man's war and a poor man's fight." The more populous North filled its armies more easily than the South. Union soldiers typically served three years, for example, but Confederates fought for the war's duration. Unlike the South, the North did not require service from all men of military age but did force state militiamen into the regular army if their states failed to meet their quota of volunteers. Draftees could also hire substitutes. In the end, the two sides drafted relatively few soldiers, for most men volunteered when faced with the stigma of conscription. Over the course of the war, a little more than half of eligible northerners served in uniform while three-fourths to four-fifths of eligible southerners did so. Though northern armies were numerically larger, the North's need to occupy captured territory and guard its supply lines kept the two sides' fighting forces almost equal. The Union and Confederate presidents were a study in contrasts. Like Abraham Lincoln, Jefferson Davis had been born in Kentucky under modest circumstances, but his family moved south and rose into the planter class of Mississippi. A West Point graduate and combat hero of the Mexican War, Davis had represented his adopted state in the US Senate and served as secretary of war in the cabinet of Franklin Pierce. Trained as a soldier, he yearned for military command but accepted the presidency as his duty. Davis was intelligent, hardworking, and supremely conscientious, but his health was poor, he was blind in one eye, and headaches and facial pain frequently immobilized him. He was also proud, stubborn, tactless, hypersensitive to criticism, and inclined to blame others for difficulties. Davis drew increasing criticism as Confederate fortunes waned, but the unbending president had few gifts for deflecting it. Like Davis, Lincoln was renowned for integrity and principle but owed much to his sense of humor, affability, and tactical flexibility. Surmounting serious childhood hardship, Lincoln had combined hard work, deep ambition, and folksy good humor to win distinction in Illinois politics. He worked patiently with unsuccessful generals, scheming politicians, and unending applicants for public office, straining to win over his numerous critics rather than alienate them further. He had a supreme gift for expressing complex truths in simple, inspiring language. As a political leader, Lincoln was incomparably superior to Davis. The two presidents also faced radically different political circumstances. In the North, party competition continued between Demo- --- crats and Republicans, and Lincoln relied on his fellow Republicans for support in Congress, in the press, and across the country. The so-called War Democrats supported the struggle for the Union while the Peace Democrats were more reluctant, but both offered concrete alternatives to unpopular policies. By contrast, Confederate leaders followed the example of John C. Calhoun, renounced political parties as corrupt and unprincipled, and tried to govern by consensus alone. As in the misnamed Era of Good Feelings, however, the absence of clear policy choices from a disciplined opposition fed personal factions and complaints of favoritism. Fiercely independent, Davis’s rivals clung to states’ rights and plagued him with unceasing criticism. ## GEOGRAPHY, STRATEGY, AND DIPLOMACY Fundamental political and geographic factors shaped all aspects of the war. The Confederacy made a critical decision, for example, when placing its capital in Richmond, Virginia, scarcely a hundred miles from Washington. The oldest English colony in America and home to a venerated dynasty of presidents and heroes, Virginia held important symbolic status, but the move to Richmond made the Confederate government seem temptingly vulnerable to direct assault. With northern editors crying “On to Richmond!,” most major battles of the war’s eastern theater pitted the North’s Army of the Potomac against the South’s Army of Northern Virginia inside the narrow corridor that fell between the two cities, the Blue Ridge Mountains, and Chesapeake Bay. Beyond the Blue Ridge, Virginia’s fertile Shenandoah Valley pointed diagonally toward the northeast, forming a refuge and breadbasket for Confederate forces and, even more, a sheltered invasion route pointed straight at the federal capital. In this theater, renowned Confederate generals like Robert E. Lee, “Stonewall” Jackson, J. E. B. Stuart, and James Longstreet played daring and dramatic games of cat-and-mouse with blundering Union adversaries until President Lincoln finally discovered in Ulysses S. Grant a military genius who could equal and finally best them. In the war’s vast western theater, several Union armies sought first to capture the Mississippi River, and then struggled to control the southern interior, starting with control of Kentucky and Missouri, pushing into Tennessee, then eastward through Georgia, and finally to the Carolinas. Other Union and Confederate armies struggled to dominate the area beyond the Mississippi, with engagements as far west as New Mexico. When the war began, General Winfield Scott, hero of the Mexican --- War and general-in-chief of the US Army, proposed to take advantage of the South’s agrarian economy by blockading its ports and seizing the Mississippi River. Unable to transport its plantation products or import essential weapons and industrial goods, he reasoned, the South would eventually collapse. The Union adopted both of Scott’s measures, but his “Anaconda Plan” would not work quickly and left the Confederate Army and government untouched. Editors and politicians mocked Scott’s plan and clamored for quicker action, though professional soldiers protested that the army was not ready to fight. A veteran politician himself, Abraham Lincoln understood the importance of public opinion. “You are green, it is true,” he admitted to his commanders, “but they are green also; you are all green alike,” and he urged them to attack. Trade and diplomacy also figured in Confederate plans for early victory. Southern orators swore that Britain’s factory economy depended on a steady supply of southern cotton, so Britain would certainly intervene on their behalf. “You dare not make war on cotton,” South Carolina senator James Henry Hammond had sneered in 1858. “No power on earth dares make war upon it.” Unfortunately for the South, however, British manufacturers held large stockpiles of raw fiber and imported more from India and Egypt. As the Union blockade tightened, the decline of the cotton trade injured southerners far more than Europeans. Confederate leaders still worked hard for diplomatic recognition, confident that foreign intervention would end the war quickly. Britain’s upper classes seemed to admire the South’s aristocratic tone and disliked the North’s bumptious democracy. As long as Lincoln refused to attack slavery, moreover, some British leaders saw no reason to prefer the Union. Confederate chances for international recognition probably peaked in the fall of 1861, when a Union naval commander seized Confederate diplomats John Mason and James Slidell from the British steamer *Trent*. British public anger might have led to intervention, but Lincoln released the two and apologized. After the Emancipation Proclamation made the end of slavery an official Union goal, chances for British aid crumbled, and the South faced its war for independence single-handed. ### BULL RUN As the Confederate government moved from Montgomery to Richmond, General P. G. T. Beauregard prepared to defend the capital --- with 20,000 men placed north of the city around a key railroad crossing named Manassas Junction. One line ran to Washington, while the other reached a second Confederate army of 12,000 men in the Shenandoah Valley commanded by General Joseph E. Johnston. General Irwin McDowell faced them with 35,000 men around Washington, while a much smaller Union force under General Robert Patterson eyed Johnston from the northern end of the valley. At Lincoln’s urging, McDowell ordered his soldiers southward on July 16, 1861. His invasion went badly from the start. Newspapers published his troop movements. Veterans traveled two and a half times faster than raw recruits. Sight-seeing ladies and congressmen followed the army with picnic baskets and binoculars to savor their anticipated triumph. Perhaps most important, General Patterson did not confine Johnston to the valley, allowing him to reinforce Beauregard by rail. The Confederates dug in along a series of hilltops above a small stream called Bull Run, which McDowell’s men crossed on the morning of July 21. Fighting raged back and forth all day across the summit. At one point, a South Carolina officer rallied his wavering troops by pointing to those of Virginia’s General Thomas J. Jackson, standing firm “like a stone wall.” The South Carolinian soon fell, but “Stonewall” Jackson survived as a Confederate icon and inspiration for two more years. By late afternoon, Johnston’s reinforcements began to arrive by train and McDowell had to withdraw. Most units made orderly retreats, but some panicked and collided with astonished congressmen as they blindly ran for their lives. By sundown, the Union’s proud army had nearly disintegrated as frightened and dispirited soldiers stumbled back to Washington through a downpour. The First Battle of Bull Run (called First Manassas by the South) had dealt the North a costly and sobering defeat. An ebullient Jefferson Davis urged his army to counterattack, but the task was too much for Beauregard’s famished, exhausted, and disorganized soldiers. Each side had sent about 18,000 men into battle. The Confederacy suffered 2,000 casualties (that is, men captured, killed, or wounded) and the Union more than twice that, with about 600 killed on each side. These were small numbers by later standards but shocking to a nation more accustomed to nearly painless victories over weaker enemies. First Bull Run bloodied both armies but left them angry and full of fight. The path to victory would be long, tragic, and brutally violent. --- # MCCLELLAN IN CHARGE The Bull Run fiasco bolstered those who claimed that the Union Army needed much more training. Lincoln gave that job and the position of general-in-chief to George B. McClellan, a brilliant West Point graduate and Mexican War veteran who had left the army to build railroads. With dashing good looks and vanity to match, the 34-year-old McClellan was a talented administrator who zealously drilled the Army of the Potomac. “Little Mac’s” men loved his careful attention to their welfare, and he reciprocated so warmly that he hated to send them into battle. Like McClellan, southern generals also paused after Bull Run to regroup and train. Confident of his own military abilities, Davis chose no general-in-chief at first but designated one senior commander for each theater of the war. He clashed endlessly over personal and strategic issues with General Joseph Johnston, his chosen leader in Virginia, but left him in place for nearly a year. While eastern armies drilled through the winter of 1861–1862, an obscure Union general struck in the west. The son of an Ohio tanner, Ulysses S. Grant had a mediocre record at West Point, an undistinguished peacetime career, a reputation for heavy drinking, and none of the dazzling social or family credentials of some of his Confederate counterparts. Named a brigadier with a congressman’s help, however, Grant silenced doubts by using a fleet of gunboats to seize a pair of key forts on the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers. The capture of Forts Henry and Donelson in February 1862 were the Union’s first significant victories, and Grant exploited them by following Tennessee’s major rivers to its southern border with Mississippi. P. G. T. Beauregard parried Grant’s thrust at the Battle of Shiloh on April 6–7, 1862, at a cost of 20,000 killed or wounded on each side, but failed to expel him from the southern heartland. Surveying the carnage afterward, Grant gave up hope for a short, painless war, and recalled “an open field so covered with the dead that it would have been possible to walk across the clearing, stepping on dead bodies, without a foot touching the ground.” Over the following year, he slowly gained control of the Mississippi River. *“I can’t spare this man,”* responded Lincoln to Grant’s critics. *“He fights.”* Prodded, perhaps, by Grant’s success, McClellan renewed the drive on Richmond in the spring of 1862. Leading an amphibious expedition down the Chesapeake, he landed near the Confederate capital on the peninsula between the York and James Rivers, but soon bogged down --- in the swamps around the Chickahominy River. Exploiting McClellan’s excess caution, Confederate commanders once more used railroads to bring reinforcements from the valley and repelled the invasion in a weeklong series of clashes known as the Battles of the Seven Days. McClellan lingered on the peninsula a while longer but finally sailed his defeated army back to Washington. Much of the credit for McClellan’s humiliation belonged to General Robert E. Lee. A former unionist from a famous planter family, Lee too had distinguished himself at West Point and in Mexico. Declining Lincoln’s invitation to command Union forces, Lee followed his state into the Confederacy after Fort Sumter. His gray beard and calm bearing cloaked a fierce appetite for attack, sometimes regardless of the consequences. With his trusted subordinates Stonewall Jackson and James Longstreet, Robert E. Lee would frustrate the Union for most of the next three years. On August 29–30, 1862, Jackson stopped another move toward Richmond at the Second Battle of Bull Run. Lee followed up by striking western Maryland, where he hoped to feed his troops, pull Maryland out of the Union, influence the North’s elections, and perhaps win foreign recognition. McClellan confronted him at Antietam Creek near Sharpsburg on September 17 and drove him back across the Potomac in one of the war’s fiercest battles. Hours of ferocious charges and countercharges around sites known simply as “the Cornfield,” “the Dunker Church,” and “Bloody Lane” took 12,000 Union and 10,000 Confederate casualties. The Battle of Antietam (called Sharpsburg by the South) marked the bloodiest single day in American military history, with more killed or wounded than the War of 1812, the Mexican War, and the Spanish-American War combined, and more than four times as many as on D-Day in World War II. Despite this staggering sacrifice, or perhaps because of it, McClellan once more hesitated to pursue his advantage. Finally losing patience with his lagging general, Lincoln relieved him and renewed his long, dispiriting quest for a victor. As he searched, the sheer magnitude of the Civil War gradually engulfed the whole country and forced drastic changes on the Union and Confederacy alike. ## The War on Slavery Fearing the results of abolition, many white northerners resisted moves against slavery, but runaway slaves undermined them by es- --- caping to Union lines, serving the Union Army, and eventually joining it. Commanders first decided they were useful enemy property. Building on that logic, Lincoln eventually concluded that slavery benefited the South too much to be protected and that his wartime authority included powers over property he would never use otherwise. The Emancipation Proclamation transformed the purposes of the war and made the end of slavery a crucial part of saving the Union. ## UNION DISSENT Lincoln faced opposing challenges as the war intensified. One group of critics became known as Radical Republicans and demanded more forceful attacks on the South. Led by Senator Benjamin Wade of Ohio, they formed the Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War in late 1861, and began to ask if McClellan’s reluctance to attack stemmed from the Democratic general’s secret southern sympathies. Fed by such suspicions, Radical Republicans steadily prodded Lincoln for aggressive military action and sterner measures against slavery. From the opposite direction, the need to appease the border states discouraged antislavery measures. In Congress, War Democrats supported the Union but not emancipation or conscription. Peace Democrats denounced the war itself. Stigmatized as “Copperheads” by Republicans, northern opponents of the war appeared among immigrant workers in eastern cities and in regions of the lower