the whole range of issues until midsummer. A trio of major speeches by veteran senators John C. Calhoun and Daniel Webster, joined by Senate freshman William H. Seward of New York, illustrated the problems facing compromise. Ill and dying, the 68-year-old Calhoun sat in the Senate on March 4, 1850, as a friend read his condemnation of the omnibus bill. Compromise could not save the Union or end the sectional dispute, the unyielding old nullifier insisted, until the North stopped questioning slavery, allowed it to spread west regardless of popular sovereignty, and gave the South a veto in national affairs. “California will become the test question,” he insisted, since the Golden State would end the balance between freedom and slavery in the Senate. “If you admit her,” he warned the --- North, "your real objects are power and aggrandizement," and secession would soon be inevitable. The speech was Calhoun's last public act; tuberculosis claimed him a few weeks later. Three days after Calhoun's threat, Daniel Webster rose in reply and summoned all his rhetorical powers to stoke the Senate's patriotism. "Mr. President," he began, "I wish to speak to-day, not as a Massachusetts man, nor as a Northern man, but as an American. . . . 'Hear me for my cause.'" He denied any hostile northern feelings and begged senators to put aside pointless quarreling, since laws allowed slavery in Texas already while climate and geography would always bar it from California and New Mexico. No one should threaten to secede over such settled questions, for "peaceable secession is an utter impossibility." But Webster's evenhandedness collided with political reality when he tried to make peace by recognizing grievances on both sides. Though he criticized the South for defending and expanding slavery, Webster shocked his own constituents by denouncing their reluctance to surrender fugitives. He even condemned his section's abolition societies. "I do not think them useful," he blasted. "I think their operations for the last twenty years have produced nothing good or valuable." Unfortunately for Webster, the concessions in his "Seventh of March Address" did not impress the South and appalled his leading constituents. The poet John Greenleaf Whittier called him a "fallen angel," and Ralph Waldo Emerson compared him to a prostitute. With reelection now impossible, Daniel Webster soon left the Senate for a brief stint as secretary of state and, like Calhoun, died within the year. Known as the "Great Triumvirate" for their eloquence, intelligence, and statesmanship between the War of 1812 and 1850, Clay, Calhoun, and Webster were leaders from a past age in American public life. What they all had in common was their belief that the Constitution protected slavery and their willingness (or in Calhoun's case, his demand) for bondage to survive and spread in order to bring political peace to white America. On March 11, 1850, Senator William F. Seward stepped forth to represent the next generation, to reject the toleration of slavery, and to demonstrate that fierce assaults now won more support than calls for compromise. Seward denounced the idea that the Constitution protected slavery but then proclaimed, "There is a higher law than the constitution" — the law of God and fundamental morality. "There is no Christian nation, thus free to choose as we are, which would establish slavery," he cried. For him, slavery contradicts "the security of --- natural rights, the diffusion of knowledge, and the freedom of industry . . . , subverts the principle of democracy, and converts the state into an aristocracy or a despotism.” The Founding Fathers condemned it and would never have imposed it on the West. Seward demanded that his colleagues do the same and admit the free state of California “without conditions, without qualifications, and without compromise.” Seward’s evocation of a “higher law” thrilled slavery’s foes but horrified southerners who thought their safety depended on northern veneration for the Constitution itself. ### THE COMPROMISE OF 1850 Eloquent as they were, Calhoun, Webster, and Seward changed few minds; only an accident broke the impasse. President Taylor suddenly fell ill, died in July, and was succeeded by Vice President Millard Fillmore. Unlike Taylor, Fillmore was a seasoned party hand who knew how to compromise and how to win friends through patronage. Calhoun was dead, Webster had resigned, and Clay left Washington with shattered health. Led by Stephen A. Douglas, Democrat of Illinois, a new group of senators stepped forward to find a solution. Realizing that the omnibus could never pass because too many senators found one or more of its features intolerable, Douglas and his allies broke the bill apart and found a different coalition to approve each component. As expected, Congress admitted California as a free state and gave New Mexico a territorial government with the option to adopt slavery. Other parts of the Mexican Cession would eventually get the same privilege of popular sovereignty, including the Mormon colony around the Great Salt Lake. These measures were blows to the South, for no one thought these territories would choose slavery. As a result, the Far West would remain free soil, even without the Wilmot Proviso. The admission of California without slavery gave the Senate to the North, moreover, and its power would increase with each new state from the region. The South’s major compensation was a much stronger Fugitive Slave Act. Congress also banned public slave auctions in the nation’s capital, funded the Texas bonds, drew the western boundary of Texas in favor of New Mexico, and paid Texas for its other land claims. The entire package of trade-offs became known as the Compromise of 1850. Most Americans hailed the compromise with relief and celebration. No congressional majority had supported the whole package, and northern congressmen who supported its pro-southern features met --- derision as cowardly "doughfaces" controlled by the "Slave Power." Even so, crowds wept, cheered, and toasted the results as a final settlement that would end the bitter disputes about slavery. In South Carolina, Georgia, and Mississippi, southern rights advocates denounced the admission of California and the loss of the Mexican Cession, and summoned state representatives to Nashville to consider resistance and even secession. Much to their disgust, however, moderates captured the Nashville Convention and blocked all radical action. On the other side, abolitionists excoriated the Fugitive Slave Act and grimly vowed to resist it, but received little attention. Whig president Fillmore and Democratic senator Douglas both called the compromise a "final settlement" and fondly predicted that the slavery debate would fade away. * A painful panic had checked both the financial exuberance of the 1830s and the ideological struggles of the Jackson administration. By the time conditions improved, certain things seemed settled. No one would or could roll back the Market Revolution, but for the present, the federal government would do little to subsidize it. There would be no national bank, and the Independent Treasury would hold the government's money. State banks would continue to supply the nation's paper currency, while states and private investors would fund most transportation development. At the same time, the political parties formed around these issues would endure and shape the republic's affairs for the foreseeable future. The competition between Whigs and Democrats constantly threw up new issues and controversies for public decision. The most immediate was western expansion. Should the United States annex Texas? What about Oregon? If these regions joined the Union, could a continental republic survive? Would republican institutions thrive in the Great West, which easterners mistakenly thought of as wasteland? In the 1840s, Americans took a chance in favor of Texas, Oregon, war with Mexico, and continental dimensions. The republic survived the controversies over war and expansion, but an underlying question almost broke it. Would the new territories be slave or free? Americans tried to compromise this question in the Mexican War's direct aftermath. The following decade showed how the "compromise" was illusory and unstable, and only paved the way for an even greater crisis. --- # CHAPTER 13 ## The House Dividing, 1850–1861 Charles Sumner could stand it no longer. In the spring of 1856, reports had reached Washington that “border ruffians” from Missouri had launched full-scale attacks on antislavery settlers in the Kansas Territory. Proslavery Senator David Atchison of Missouri had openly vowed to send enough gunmen “to kill every God-damned abolitionist in the Territory” and ensure a proslavery victory in the upcoming elections. As faraway violence mounted, the senior senator from Massachusetts delivered one of the most scathing speeches ever heard in the Senate, condemning what he called “the Crime against Kansas” in language that no one could forget. At the age of 45, Charles Sumner stood six feet four inches tall, with a sturdy frame and good looks to match. He sprang from ancient Puritan stock and inherited a Puritan’s confidence in his own righteousness. He rivaled his predecessor Daniel Webster in legal knowledge and rhetorical power, but unlike Webster, he was bitterly hostile to slavery and made his reputation in the Senate for his passionate attacks on the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850. When Sumner stood for recognition on the afternoon of May 19, 1856, spectators expected a blistering address, but the outcome far exceeded their expectations. Dropping the Senate’s customary decorum, Sumner ripped into southerners’ claims of cultural superiority. In his view, the resort to violence had revealed them as sexual monsters who committed “the rape of a virgin territory, compelling it to the hateful embrace of slavery ... force being openly employed in compelling Kansas to the pollution.” Proslavery raiders were not polished aristocrats but “hirelings picked from the drunken spew and vomit of an uneasy civilization.” And southern inferiority was no accident, he scoffed, for the “shameful imbecility of slavery” could never equal “the manifold and endless intellectual activity” that prevailed in Massachusetts. --- [The image shows a political cartoon titled "FORCING SLAVERY DOWN THE THROAT OF A FREESOILER." It depicts a large head of a man with his mouth wide open, and several smaller men forcing a figure labeled "MURDER!!! help—neighbors help, O my poor Wife and Children" down his throat. The cartoon is a commentary on slavery and political pressure in the 1850s. The caption below the cartoon reads: "FIGURE 9. In 1856, antislavery voters thought President James Buchanan (second from right) and other leading Democrats were courting the South by forcing slavery into Kansas and elsewhere. Cartoon Prints, American Rare Book and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress, LC-USZ62-92043."] Sumner did not stop there. Undoubtedly remembering that southerners had already called him a "serpent," a "filthy reptile," and a "leper," he laced his critique with personal attacks and sexual innuendo. His chief target was Senator Andrew Pickens Butler of South Carolina, a popular and affable 60-year-old who had strongly defended the attackers from Missouri. "The senator from South Carolina has read many books of chivalry, and believes himself a chivalrous knight," Sumner began. "Of course he has a mistress to whom he has made his vows, and who, though ugly to others, is always lovely to him; though polluted in the sight of the world, is chaste in his sight. I mean the harlot Slavery." Going further, Sumner even mocked his opponent for "the loose expectoration of his speech," alluding to a facial condition that caused Butler to lose saliva when he spoke. Sumner's oration created an instant sensation. Democratic adversaries immediately denounced Sumner's abusive language, but Representative Preston S. Brooks of South Carolina went further. For him, --- Sumner had defiled the honor of South Carolina and his family. Butler was both out of town and too frail to act for himself, so the duty of revenge fell on Brooks, his distant cousin. As the Carolinian said later, “I should have forfeited my own self-respect, and perhaps the good opinion of my countrymen, if I had failed to resent such an injury.” A duel was out of the question, for Sumner would only have Brooks prosecuted. Besides, only gentlemen could fight duels, and by South Carolina standards, Sumner did not qualify. In his case, the code of honor demanded a flogging. Brooks was younger than Sumner but shorter, weaker, and handicapped by an injury from the Mexican War. Nevertheless, he selected a gold-headed walking stick made of “guttapercha,” a kind of hardened rubber, and stalked his target. Two days after the speech, Brooks found Sumner in the Senate chamber signing papers after adjournment. Quickly advancing, Brooks accused Sumner of insulting his state and his relative and began raining blows on the senator’s head and shoulders. Knees pinned beneath his desk, the victim could not rise until, with an immense heave, he ripped the bolted furniture from the floor. It was too late. By his own account, Brooks struck Sumner at least 30 times until he shattered his cane. When onlookers finally pulled him away, the senator from Massachusetts lay sprawled across the floor, bloody and unconscious. How could this have happened? The representatives of Massachusetts and South Carolina had once fought together for independence and the Constitution. Now, less than seven decades later, they were spilling blood in the Capitol itself while the citizens of the rival sections applauded. “Are we to be chastised as they chastise their slaves?” asked a prominent New York newspaper. The Richmond Enquirer replied affirmatively, pronouncing Brooks’s deed “good in conception, better in execution, and best of all in consequence. The vulgar Abolitionists . . . must be lashed into submission.” Farther south, tumultuous meetings showered Brooks with replacement canes, inscribed with slogans like “Use knock-down arguments.” Though North and South still professed support for their common republican ideals, rival interpretations had brought them to the brink of war. ## Old Parties Decline By the time of Brooks’s attack on Sumner, sectional antipathies had almost killed the Second Party System. Racial prejudice still flourished in the North, but moral distaste for enslavement had intensified. Even --- more, white northerners dreaded the possibility that slavery’s penetration of the western territories would bar them from fresh opportunities by denying free society its room to grow. Finally, northerners resented the South’s seemingly endless and arrogant demands for special treatment, and worried that a Slave Power conspiracy had gained control of the government. In this climate, northern politicians who cooperated with the South (as the Second Party System demanded) risked political destruction. For their part, white southerners could not forget the abusive speeches of abolitionists and free-soilers and the painful sensation that the civilized world had raised its hands against them. To win elections in this hypersensitive climate, southern politicians vied with one another to see who could deliver the fiercest defense of slavery, thereby sending a steadily mounting number of sectional extremists, or “fire-eaters,” to Washington. As sectional tension continued to build, northern Democratic “doughfaces” seemed to be the only candidates with a prayer of nationwide support, despite the “final settlement” promised by the Compromise of 1850. ### THE FUGITIVE SLAVE ACT Public response to the new Fugitive Slave Act illustrated how the Compromise of 1850 fed hostility instead of peace. Infuriated by northern assistance to runaways, slaveholders had demanded a stronger Fugitive Slave Act in return for the admission of California and insisted on its strict enforcement. Overturning many personal liberty laws, the new legislation required state officials and local bystanders to help recapture fugitives and imposed criminal penalties for refusing. In an open invitation to kidnapping, owners could capture and enslave an alleged fugitive with a simple oath to a commissioner, without a jury trial or proof of ownership. Under the act’s crassest feature, the commissioner who returned an alleged runaway to his or her captors received a ten-dollar fee, while deciding for liberty only brought five dollars. As soon as the new law passed, vigilant masters and professional slave catchers swooped down on free black communities in search of their legal chattels. In several well-publicized cases, they shocked public opinion by dragging peaceful and law-abiding blacks from their families and returning them to plantations they had not seen for years. In 1851, white and black vigilantes successfully fought a highly publicized battle with Boston police to seize a jailed fugitive named Shad- --- rach and whisked him off to Canada. A similar effort spirited William and Ellen Craft to England but failed to prevent the re-enslavement of Anthony Burns in 1854, despite mass attacks on the Boston courthouse by angry crowds of black and white abolitionists. Southerners who viewed the Fugitive Slave Act as their only tangible gain from the compromise observed these struggles with fury. If northern mobs could “nullify” a federal law, where could the South find protection? Compared to the total slave population, the number of escaped slaves was never large, but those who did escape had a political importance far disproportionate to their numbers. By continually testing the strength of their chains, the runaways exposed the illusion of black docility and put human faces on the slavery controversy. Their courageous efforts thus kept public attention on the slaves’ plight, tempting southern leaders into foolish extremism and undermining northern efforts to ignore the problem. The most eloquent opponent of the Fugitive Slave Act was Harriet Beecher Stowe, daughter of the famed evangelist Lyman Beecher and wife of an antislavery minister. In 1851, after years of work among free blacks and runaways in Cincinnati, Stowe reacted to the new law with an explosive novel. First published in installments by an abolitionist newspaper, *Uncle Tom’s Cabin* appeared as a book in 1852 and became a runaway best seller in the North and in Europe, but laws banning antislavery publications kept most southerners from ever seeing it. By 1860, over 3 million copies circulated in America and 3.5 million in Europe, though an unfavorable contract and permissive copyright laws denied its author any profits. Stowe’s gripping tale intertwined the pathetic story of saintly Uncle Tom, sold from his happy Kentucky home to the Louisiana plantation of the monstrous Simon Legree, with the intrepid saga of Eliza Harris, who ran across the ice-choked Ohio River to prevent the sale of her lovely child. Occasionally mawkish and sentimental, the novel nonetheless conveyed the horrors of slavery and the humanity of slaves by a dazzling array of colorful and convincing characters. Stowe did not vilify white southerners as innately immoral, but made Legree, her greatest villain, a transplanted northerner. Fundamentally, she argued that the system of slavery blinded otherwise decent people and drove even the best masters into actions with unspeakable consequences. Southern critics denounced *Uncle Tom’s Cabin* as dangerous rubbish, but millions of northerners embraced the book itself and the traveling stage versions that soon crisscrossed their section. --- # THE ELECTION OF 1852 Despite the furor over runaways, most veteran politicians turned to the presidential election of 1852 as if the established patterns of the Second Party System would easily resume. Unable to choose among prominent leaders Lewis Cass, Stephen A. Douglas, and James Buchanan, Democrats united behind the little-known Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire. Whigs were less fortunate in their search for party unity. Their convention tried to please the South by endorsing the Compromise of 1850, including the Fugitive Slave Act. For the sake of balance, however, it abandoned the pro-compromise incumbent Millard Fillmore in favor of General Winfield Scott, the conqueror of Mexico whose antislavery leanings appealed to northern Whigs. This outcome pleased nobody, for northern Whigs despised the platform and southerners hated the nominee, leading voters in both sections to abandon the ticket in droves. As a result, Franklin Pierce won handily in 1852, capturing all but four states. Whigs also suffered serious losses in Congress, especially in the Deep South, where local Whigs were blamed for the antislavery speeches of their northern colleagues. As southern voters moved heavily toward the Democrats after 1852, the South’s influence over the Democrats grew dramatically. Beneath the façade of normal party competition, political professionals began to realize uncomfortably that the old grounds of party rivalry had eroded. The depression of the 1840s had lifted, and the two parties could no longer win votes by blaming it on each other. The Bank of the United States had been dead for over a decade, and even diehard Whigs had no reason to revive it. Gold from California fed an economic boom that fueled the growth of banks and railroads. Heedless of old party principles, Democrats joined with Whigs in nearly every state to bring corporate charters and railroad construction to their constituents. Awash with new revenues, state governments suspended party animosities and agreed on new systems of public schools and reform institutions like penitentiaries, orphanages, and mental hospitals. As party hostility declined, moreover, many states were able to agree on constitutional reforms that replaced appointive officers with elected ones, expanded voting