and served its purpose, but refused it when excessive currency issues brought runaway inflation. In the process, states discovered how hard it would be to address fiscal and monetary controversies without treating one class better than another. ## UPHEAVAL IN NEW ENGLAND Rhode Island had the worst experience with paper money. When inflation sapped the value of its notes, the legislature tried to restore them with a legal tender law that blocked the collection of a debt when the creditor refused payment in paper money. The law created a ludicrous situation in which debtors chased their creditors with offers of worthless currency. If the hapless creditor managed to escape, the debtor could discharge his obligation by depositing his bills with a state court. Rhode Island’s disastrous experiment convinced merchants, lawyers, and other men of property that democracy would always undermine public virtue by tempting the many to rob the few. Their opinion spread widely in the press, giving Rhode Island a notorious reputation for recklessness and dishonesty. Neighboring Massachusetts took the opposite approach. Heavily influenced by Boston creditors, the legislature decided to pay the public debt by raising taxes instead of printing money. Authorities hauled those who could not pay into court, often sent them to debtor’s prison, and sometimes took their farms. Pressure grew so great in 1786 that Connecticut River Valley farmers repeated the actions of the Carolina Regulators from a generation earlier and formed mobs to close courts and prevent the seizure of property. They too called themselves Regulators. Authorities identified Daniel Shays, an insolvent farmer and former captain in the Continental Army, as the ringleader and dubbed the movement Shays’s Rebellion, but Shays was only one of several important leaders. After several court closings, the climax came when 1,200 Regulators attempted to seize the federal armory in Springfield in January 1787 but fled before the defenders’ artillery. Determined to preserve order and enforce the law, Governor James Bowdoin sent a militia of 3,000 volunteers who defeated and scattered the Regulators after a brief skirmish. Men like Daniel Shays obviously questioned the virtue of public policies that enriched Boston creditors by ruining hard-working yeomen, but conservative officials were horrified. Suddenly, it seemed, men of the “revolution from below” had turned on their legitimate --- leaders and raised the prospect of a revolution gone mad. General Henry Knox misinformed George Washington that the protestors were "determined to annihilate all debts public and private and have agrarian laws" that would redistribute private property. Others warned of anarchy, the collapse of the republic, a return to the state of nature, a collapse into savagery. Such charges were absurd if taken literally, but they accurately reflected the fear that popular majorities were indeed unsuited for self-government. From their perspective, the real danger was that Massachusetts and other states could become like Rhode Island, where men like Shays ran the legislature, and laws threatened property more seriously than riots ever could. As Noah Webster put it, illegal disturbances were not as worrisome as "so many legal infractions of sacred right—so many public invasions of private property—so many wanton abuses of legislative powers!" Reacting to the troubles in Rhode Island and Massachusetts, more and more thoughtful revolutionaries, not all of them conservatives in a narrow sense, began to doubt the unfettered wisdom or virtue of the voters, and to believe that democratic majorities in the states must somehow be restrained. In Philadelphia, humanitarian Benjamin Rush reflected that "in our opposition to monarchy, we forgot that the temple of tyranny has two doors. We bolted one of them by proper restraints; but we left the other open, by neglecting to guard against the effects of our own ignorance and licentiousness." In reality, the Massachusetts protests were not the fault of a weak central government. In their aftermath, however, men who had resisted modest measures to strengthen the Articles of Confederation began to reconsider. Most of them knew that simple repression was no solution to the problem of political conflict, whether in petty matters like the jailing of William Thompson or in grander events like the Massachusetts Regulator movement. They also realized that taxing foreign trade was the best way to pay the national debt, and that required the power to set uniform duties and regulations. After a long and painful struggle, the United States Constitution became their chosen remedy to these problems. ## The Movement for a Stronger Union Cosmopolitan Americans of the 1780s hoped that a stronger central government would right the new nation’s finances and allow the commercial economy to recover. Firm national authority and a sound economy would enable the United States to hold its own with rival --- nations, expel the British from the Northwest, and subdue the Native Americans who vied to control it. Above all, the central government should restrain what the "continentally minded" saw as the follies and abuses of state governments. The task called for difficult wrangling and tedious negotiations, so creating the American Constitution would be the most challenging political exercise of the Revolutionary generation. ### JAMES MADISON COMES FORWARD Virginia's James Madison became the most influential leader of the movement to correct the problems of the Articles of Confederation. Like his friends Washington and Jefferson, Madison grew up in a respectable planter family. Unlike Jefferson, Madison was physically slight and painfully shy, and his intellectual interests did not embrace every field of learning but focused on history, government, and law. Showing early academic promise, Madison graduated from Princeton University (then called the College of New Jersey) in 1772 and returned to his father's estate in search of a career. The young Virginian soon found his vocation in Revolutionary politics. He fought the Intolerable Acts on local committees, and then rose to the Governor's Council and the Continental Congress, all before turning 30. After the war, he served in Virginia's General Assembly and thought he saw how the self-interest, narrow-mindedness, and parochialism of his fellow lawmakers could repeatedly frustrate good government and the best interests of the whole Union. > "How easily are base and selfish measures masked by pretexts of public good and apparent expediency," he later protested. "Individuals join without remorse in acts, against which their consciences would revolt if proposed to them under the like sanction, separately in their closets [i.e., in private]." Moving to the Confederation Congress, Madison witnessed the paralyzing weakness of the Confederation government, but also remembered the specific interests of Virginia and the need to protect local liberties. As he saw it, the problem was to devise a system of government that would strengthen the nation and curb the misbehavior of the states without crushing popular liberty or legitimate rights of the states—a system he would later call "partly national and partly federal." He began by persuading the Virginia legislature to invite representatives of all the states to meet at Annapolis, Maryland, to recommend a common set of commercial regulations. Only five states attended the Annapolis Convention of September --- 1786, so the delegates issued a report on the weakness of the existing government and called for a larger convention at Philadelphia in May 1787. Madison then won the endorsement of the Virginia legislature and the Confederation Congress. He coaxed George Washington to lend his presence and his prestige, and Washington ultimately presided over the convention. One by one, all the states except Rhode Island agreed to meet, and 55 of America’s most distinguished statesmen slowly converged on Philadelphia, the recent din of Shays’s Rebellion still ringing in their ears. ### DELEGATES TO THE FEDERAL CONVENTION Almost all the men who attended the federal convention favored a stronger central government, for state leaders who opposed the idea showed little interest in coming. Patrick Henry said he “smelt a rat,” and like-minded localists like Samuel Adams of Massachusetts and Richard Henry Lee of Virginia probably shared his suspicions. The Virginia delegation was one of the most distinguished, and included Washington, Madison, Governor Edmund Randolph, and George Mason, the principal author of Virginia’s constitution and its Declaration of Rights. The aging Benjamin Franklin headed the Pennsylvania delegation, but active leadership fell to legal scholars James Wilson and Gouverneur Morris. John Dickinson joined them as a representative of Delaware, while John Rutledge, the autocratic Charlestonian, came from South Carolina. Other active delegates included Alexander Hamilton of New York, William Paterson of New Jersey, Roger Sherman of Connecticut, and Rufus King of Massachusetts. Missing were John Adams, minister to Great Britain, and Thomas Jefferson, minister to France. Like Madison himself, who had put in long weary hours at the Confederation Congress, most delegates had significant “continental” experience that taught them to see American problems from a national instead of a local perspective. As a group, they firmly supported stronger government but also cherished the interests of their individual states, so agreement between them would not be easy. ### THE VIRGINIA PLAN Madison carefully prepared for the convention with thorough research in classical political theory, the history of ancient republics and con- --- federacies, and the current politics of the states. The delegates were only authorized to suggest revisions to the Articles of Confederation, but Madison resolved to ask for something bigger, and when the convention agreed to deliberate in secret, he pressed for an entirely new frame of government. The Virginian began by persuading his own delegation. He urged them to abandon the fundamental principle of the Articles, that the central government was simply a league in which each member state had a single vote and whose decisions only operated on the member governments rather than on the general population itself. In his view, the “one state, one vote” rule had given small states the power to frustrate the will of the majority, while the idea of a league of states made it impossible for a majority of the American people to take shape and assert themselves. In place of the Articles, Madison wanted a government derived from the whole American electorate, making laws to bind the people themselves instead of issuing recommendations to the state governments. In effect, his proposal would bring the concept of a single “American people” into legal existence for the first time, as distinct from the separate peoples of thirteen discordant states. Going further, Madison proposed that the central government consist of three distinct branches—executive, legislative, and judicial—each with its own powers, but each with significant checks upon the powers of the others. His new congress would have wide-ranging authority, including the power to levy taxes, to regulate interstate and foreign commerce, and even to veto state legislation. To limit the power of small states, he wanted to distribute all the seats in the congress on the basis of population. When the Virginia delegation agreed to Madison’s broad outline, Governor Edmund Randolph presented it to a startled convention in his opening speech, and the proposal became known as the Virginia Plan. Discussion quickly revealed that some representatives thought the Virginia Plan went too far, especially in using population to allocate votes in both houses of the new congress. Still fearing that the possession of western lands would enable the larger states to monopolize wealth, population, and political power at the expense of the landless, William Paterson of New Jersey presented an alternative, the New Jersey Plan. His proposal kept the basic framework of the Articles of Confederation, including the unicameral congress based on “one state, one vote,” but added executive and judicial branches and the power to legislate for states and individuals. When the New Jersey Plan failed to --- attract a majority, its supporters acquiesced in Virginia’s overall framework, though they continued to contest the distribution of congressional seats on the basis of population. # SLAVERY AND REPRESENTATION The convention divided more deeply over the question of slavery. Human bondage was dying north of Maryland, but African slaves composed a large portion of both population and property in the southern states, so how should these slaves be counted? Northern delegates argued that counting slaves like citizens would only inflate the power of their masters. Southerners replied that slaves were valuable property. As South Carolina’s Charles Coatesworth Pinckney put it, “property in slaves should not be exposed to danger under a Government instituted for the protection of property,” so masters deserved more seats to defend their property interests. The two sides reversed their arguments on the subject of taxation. Southerners did not want to count their slaves for tax purposes while northerners insisted they must. Though the delegates did not discuss the outright abolition of slavery, some wanted to ban the African slave trade to the United States. Pennsylvanian Gouverneur Morris was especially vehement, calling slavery a “nefarious institution” that contradicted “the most sacred laws of humanity” and blighted the economy wherever it flourished. Southerners would not budge, however, so the delegates allowed the slave trade to continue for another twenty years. Later on, Madison himself admitted, “The real difference of interests lay, not between the large and the small [states], but between the Northern and Southern states. The institution of slavery and its consequences formed the line of discrimination.” The question of representation nearly split the convention irreparably, but Roger Sherman of Connecticut suggested a compromise that eventually proved acceptable. He proposed to give each state two members of the upper house, or Senate, to be chosen by their state legislatures for terms of six years. Members of the lower house, or House of Representatives, would be allocated among the states by population and chosen by the voters for two-year terms. By design, short terms and direct election would keep the representatives closely attuned to popular opinion, while long terms and indirect election would insulate the senators from public pressure. The lower house would have exclusive power to initiate money bills, giving an upper --- hand to the more populous states in matters of taxation and finance. To determine population for the purposes of taxation and representation, Sherman employed a formula debated by the Confederation Congress, and apportioned each on the basis of all free persons and three-fifths of all “others.” His three-fifths compromise thus gave special protection to the interests of slaveholders without using the word “slave” in the Constitution itself. ### THREE BALANCED BRANCHES Most delegates assumed that the new government would not be able to take any actions that were not explicitly authorized in the founding document, so they finished their work by spelling out the specific powers of each government branch. In a post tailor-made for George Washington, a single executive officer called the president would exercise unprecedented powers over war and peace, federal law enforcement, the final approval of legislation, and the overall direction of the government. Like senators, he would not be chosen by the voters directly, but by a special body called the Electoral College in which each state had as many members, or electors, as the combined number of its senators and congressmen. Each elector, or member of the Electoral College, would cast two votes; the majority winner became president, and the runner-up, vice president. Since a state’s electoral vote depended on its number of congressional representatives, the three-fifths compromise also boosted the South’s power in choosing the president. In the beginning, most state legislatures chose their electors but later passed the choice to their voters. The Constitution’s final draft also stripped state legislatures of their powers to issue paper money, pass legal tender laws, interfere with contracts, or impede the collection of debts. The federal government could suppress rebellions in the states, whether by slaves or by free insurgents like Daniel Shays. As further concessions to slaveholders, the Constitution declared that “No Person held to Service or Labour in one state” could gain freedom by escaping to another, once again avoiding the word “slave.” Congress would have exclusive power over interstate and international commerce, and its laws and treaties and the Constitution itself would be the “supreme Law of the Land.” To avoid an excessive concentration of power, a series of checks and balances allowed each branch of the government to limit the powers of the others. The presi --- dent could veto legislation, for example, but Congress could override him by a two-thirds vote. The president also had the power to negotiate treaties, but they would not go into effect until ratified by two-thirds of the Senate. Though the president was potentially quite powerful, Congress could impeach him and remove him from office for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors." A loosely sketched judiciary branch, staffed by judges appointed by the president, confirmed by the Senate, and serving for life, would enforce the Constitution and the laws. Shrewd lawyers realized that the federal courts could thus invalidate state laws by declaring them unconstitutional. Madison never got the congressional veto over state legislation he wanted, but the power of judicial review, as it came to be called, became an almost equally powerful substitute. In effect, the proposed Constitution strictly limited the direct influence of voters on the government and settled almost all major controversies over debts, paper money, and national finances in favor of cosmopolitans over localists. Not surprisingly, its reception was controversial. The convention adjourned on September 17, 1787, and submitted its work to the Confederation Congress. Thirty-nine delegates signed it, three refused, and the others went home early. The document proposed a new ratification procedure that reflected the ideas of sovereignty developed in the Massachusetts constitutional debate of 1780. Each state would choose a ratifying convention that was independent of its legislature. The Constitution would go into effect when nine of the thirteen states had ratified it, and the Confederation government would disappear. Without passing judgment on the new proposal, the Confederation Congress submitted it to the states, launching a sweeping national debate over ratification. # The Ratification Debate Friends of the new Constitution quickly assumed the misleading name federalists, which suggested that their support for a federated government of separate states was stronger than it really was. This move left their opponents with the awkward and uninspiring label of antifederalists. Of the two sides, federalists enjoyed intellectual facility, enormous prestige, unity of purpose, and dominance of the press, while antifederalists were frequently isolated and disjointed, even from each other. Three leading federalists — James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay — would use their advantages to the fullest in writing --- a brilliant set of essays that became known as *The Federalist Papers*, which expounded the Constitution’s basic tenets and sought to convince doubters that the new government would not endanger liberty but protect it. The federalists triumphed, but the antifederalists won a supremely important concession. In the aftermath of victory, and almost as an afterthought, federalists agreed to mollify their defeated opponents by amending the Constitution to include a bill of rights. ## FEDERALISTS AND ANTIFEDERALISTS The debate between federalists and antifederalists featured two rival visions of the United States’ future. Federalists looked forward to a strong and united republic in which the interests of average Americans were balanced and overseen by traditional leaders from the “better sort” of people. They were friendly to the needs of commerce, creditors, and economic development, and while they genuinely believed that the people must rule themselves, they also believed that popular majorities must be firmly guided by a well-trained and respected elite. More frankly elitist than most, Alexander Hamilton of New York had explicitly voiced their leanings in the convention. “All communities divide themselves into the few and the many,” he declared. “The first are the rich and well born, the other the mass of the people. . . . Give to the first class a distinct, permanent share in the government . . . [and they] will ever maintain good government.” Antifederalists accepted the idea of union, but they still believed that strong state governments were the only reliable protection for popular liberties. As one North Carolina antifederalist put it, “I know the necessity of a federal government, I therefore wish this was one in which our liberties and privileges were secured.” Some antifederalists were locally distinguished members of the “better sort” who feared that more distant cosmopolitans would somehow displace them under the new order. Building on the “revolution from below,” others were less prominent Americans who had found a way to influence their state governments but worried that the new central government would be too distant for them to master. For many antifederalists, the struggle over the Constitution also resembled a replay of earlier English rivalries between the Court and the Country Parties. The federalists wanted to create a strong central government, or “court,” that favored banking, commerce, and high taxes, while the antifederalists played the role of the “country” oppo- --- sition, defending liberty and the blessings of a simple agricultural way of life. It is hard to reduce support or opposition to the Constitution to narrow economic interests, for men of greater or lesser property took both sides. In effect, however, William Thompson had known what he was talking about—the federalist leaders stood out for "their pride, influence, ambition, connections, wealth and political principles," while antifederalists were conspicuous for humbler qualities. In that broad sense, the debate over the Constitution was indeed a class struggle between aristocracy and democracy. Federalist and antifederalist constituencies differed even more than their respective leaders, for federalist districts were much more likely to hug the economically advanced sections of the coast, while antifederalists predominated in the backcountry, except in the most remote frontier regions where inhabitants wanted a stronger government to protect them from the Indians. Within the different districts, however, distinct groups of citizens often saw their interests in similar ways and class lines were less sharply drawn. In coastal cities, merchant groups generally favored the Constitution, hoping that the new government could foster commerce, pay the national debt, and protect private property. Within the same communities, federalist artisans also supported the Constitution because they wanted tariff protection from British imports. In rural areas near navigable water, commercial farmers and planters joined their city neighbors in favor of the Constitution because they anticipated improved foreign trade. In the backcountry, however, prosperous community leaders were still locally minded and often led their neighbors in opposing ratification. Low voter turnout in the election of delegates to the ratification conventions suggests that many of the poorest voters were ill-informed about the issues and did not care strongly about the outcome. Federalists began the ratification process with a few quick and easy victories in small states that could never hope to go it alone in a weakened union: Delaware (December 7, 1787), New Jersey (December 18, 1787), Georgia (January 2, 1788), and Connecticut (January