rights, and streamlined the granting of corporate charters. Despite their obvious benefits, each of these new policies weakened the existing parties, either by removing the grounds for their disputes or reducing the patronage power of their bosses. Making matters worse, a wave of financial scandals fed doubts about all established politicians. --- As consensus grew among officeholders and cynicism spread among voters, close observers noticed that declining party differences made the parties themselves less interesting. "The real grounds of difference upon important political questions no longer correspond with party lines," complained Rutherford B. Hayes, an Ohio Whig who would gain the presidency in 1877. "The people's progress, progress of every sort, no longer depends on government." A writer in the prestigious *North American Review* agreed. "These party names of Whig and Democrat now mean nothing and point to nothing," he complained in 1853. "The contest between them, in respect to principles and measures, has virtually ceased, and the opposition is only kept alive as a means of political intrigue and an avenue for the attainment of public office." As such thinking spread, ambitious politicians began looking for new problems or threats that would mobilize voters more effectively. ### THE KANSAS-NEBRASKA ACT Senator Stephen A. Douglas, Democrat of Illinois, stood foremost among this rising political generation. Standing only five feet four inches tall, the "Little Giant" had outsized ambitions for the presidency and knew he needed southern and northern Democrats in order to realize them. As in the days of James K. Polk, support for western expansion might do the trick by appealing to Democrats of both sections and fueling differences with anti-expansionist Whigs. Douglas also wanted a railroad from Chicago to California, but no company would touch this daring project without a local government to protect its investment. Trying to combine the interests of the railroad, his party, and himself, Douglas thus proposed a territorial government for the land between the Missouri River and the Rocky Mountains. If Congress agreed, he would also propose a federal subsidy of the railroad and grants of free land to settlers along the way. With his Jacksonian upbringing, Stephen A. Douglas might have known that federal aid to a railroad should bring trouble to a Democrat, but in the atmosphere of party consensus that reigned in the 1850s, he forgot this lesson from the past. When Congress reassembled in December 1853, Douglas introduced a measure to organize the Nebraska Territory in the remaining portion of the Louisiana Purchase lying north of 36°30'. To please the South, he included a provision for popular sovereignty over slavery, which removed the guarantee of free soil provided by the Missouri Compromise. The change was harmless, Douglas reasoned, for hostile --- voters and unfriendly climate would always keep slavery off the plains. He also told critics that the Compromise of 1850 had made popular sovereignty the new national policy for slavery in the territories and rendered the Missouri Compromise obsolete. Allowing the people to choose for themselves was the only sound doctrine for Democrats, he insisted, and the only way to respect both sections equally. "The great principle of self government is at stake," he assured a friendly Georgian, "and surely the people of this country are never going to decide that the principle upon which our whole republican system rests is vicious and wrong." Southerners of both parties had long resented the antislavery features of the Missouri Compromise and joined together in favor of Douglas's bill. President Pierce supported it too, hoping that the principle of popular sovereignty would unify the Democrats and ease the passage of his other favorite measures. The bill's final version created two territories, Kansas and Nebraska, and declared the Missouri Compromise "inoperative and void." It passed in May 1854, with most southerners and half the northern Democrats voting in favor. Defying its sponsors' calculations, the Kansas-Nebraska Act enraged large portions of the northern electorate and split the Democratic Party. Opponents charged that spineless northerners had once again submitted to a shadowy force they called the Slave Power and revoked a solemn national covenant to protect free soil. Six members of the Free Soil Party rallied opposition with a scorching manifesto, "The Appeal of the Independent Democrats in Congress to the People of the United States." Drafted by Ohio congressman Salmon P. Chase, the appeal condemned the Kansas-Nebraska Act as "a gross violation of a sacred pledge" and "a criminal betrayal of precious rights." It was "part and parcel of an atrocious plot," Chase charged, to exclude yeomen farmers from the frontier's land of shining opportunity and reduce it to a "dreary region of despotism, inhabited by masters and slaves." Pledging undying resistance to "the domination of slavery," signers of the appeal reminded readers that "the cause of human freedom is the cause of God." Voters showed their approval when 66 northern Democratic congressmen lost their seats in the 1854 elections. Taking up the cry, mass rallies denounced the Kansas-Nebraska Act throughout the North, more convinced than ever that a Slave Power conspiracy would bar northern freemen from the West. If the Slave Power could overwhelm the territories, moreover, could it somehow capture the states as well, and fasten its hideous system throughout the --- country? Suddenly such thoughts no longer seemed paranoid. Once again, the liberty of white Americans seemed in danger, and thousands of angry northerners rallied to save it. At the height of the furious protest, Stephen A. Douglas admitted ruefully that he could travel from Washington to Chicago by the light of his burning effigies. # New Parties Arise The Kansas-Nebraska Act split both parties on sectional lines, and disillusioned voters sought political alternatives. Many southern Whigs left their party for the Democrats, and southern rights supporters grew more vocal. In the Northeast, a sudden influx of immigrants troubled many Protestant voters and drew many Whigs into a movement against foreigners and Catholics. Slavery in the nearby territories bothered more midwesterners than the largely urban problem of immigration, and there the free-soil Whigs and Democrats forged antislavery alliances that soon coalesced as the Republican Party. The combined effects of these political movements would eventually put an end to the Second Party System. ### IMMIGRANTS AND KNOW-NOTHINGS From 1845 to 1851, a devastating blight destroyed Europe’s potato crop, with especially harsh effects in rural Ireland, where peasants had little else to eat. As many as 1 million Irish starved to death in the resulting Great Famine, and about the same number found refuge in America. Impoverished by disaster, most of these exiles lacked the resources to farm and took whatever jobs they could find, often as laborers or domestic servants. Each wave of migrants drew friends and relatives to join them, until chain migration had brought nearly 3 million more Irish to America by the end of the nineteenth century. As many as 1.5 million German immigrants also came between 1840 and 1860. Not quite so poor as the Irish, Germans gravitated to midwestern towns and cities and looked for work in their growing industries. In the decade that followed 1845, the United States absorbed almost 3 million immigrants, or 14.5 percent of its population. The newcomers entered a society with little recent experience of massive immigration. Many of the Germans and almost all the Irish were Roman Catholic, while most native-born Americans were Protestants with tenacious prejudices against “popery.” In recent de- --- cades, the Second Great Awakening had convinced many of them that evangelical conversion was not only necessary for salvation but also essential for industry, frugality, sobriety, and worldly success. In addition, many working-class Protestants resented competition for jobs and housing, especially when a sudden recession struck in 1854 and idled thousands of Irish laborers in remote communities that were ill prepared to absorb them. As immigration mounted after 1850, complaints intensified that the foreign-born were filling up America’s prisons and almshouses and that Europe must be dumping its least desirable inhabitants on US shores. Nativists also worried that foreigners and Catholics drank too much and that their clergy would demand tax support for parochial schools and control the votes of their parishioners. Leading political parties reacted differently to immigration. Upholding economic and moral improvement, Whigs felt strong ties to evangelical Protestantism and lauded middle-class virtues that immigrants supposedly lacked such as industry, frugality, and temperance. Whig employers needed immigrant workers but often wanted to control them on and off the job, and Whig reformers worried that poverty, superstition, and alcohol blinded the immigrants to the need for self-improvement. With important exceptions like Abraham Lincoln and William Seward, many Whigs lumped together Catholics, foreigners, and unruly workers as equally undesirable. By contrast, Democrats had deep roots among religious minorities and deistic Jeffersonians, defended liberty and equality, and resisted the mixture of faith and politics. Though often steeped in racial prejudice, Democrats tolerated cultural differences among whites and made republican principles their only test of a good American. Most Irish voters had been staunch Democrats since the 1790s, and those in the latest wave were no different. When party politicians seemed more concerned by slavery than immigration, fearful citizens turned instead to the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, a New York secret society founded in 1849 and pledged to exclude all foreigners from public office and require 21 years for naturalized citizenship. Members answered prying questions with the bland denial “I know nothing,” which led others to call them “Know-Nothings.” Spreading rapidly across the North after 1853, the Know-Nothings often stunned established leaders by routing conventional candidates with massive blocs of votes delivered without warning to political unknowns. For a brief period in the mid-1850s, between --- 800,000 and 1.5 million American men poured into Know-Nothing lodges. They abandoned secrecy in 1855 and campaigned openly as the American Party, or Know-Nothing Party. Know-Nothings enjoyed a brief but spectacular success. Attracting antislavery voters and disillusioned Whigs, they chose the governor of Massachusetts in 1854 and the majority of its legislature the following year, along with most of the elected officials in New England. In the same period, they closely trailed Democrats in the mid-Atlantic states and offered a home to ex-Whigs in the Upper South. Millard Fillmore, their candidate in the 1856 presidential election, won 21.2 percent of the popular vote, even though many supporters were diverted to John C. Frémont of the equally upstart Republican Party. By 1857, however, the American Party was virtually dead, replaced by the rapidly growing Republicans. ### THE REPUBLICAN CHALLENGE Coalitions of Democrats, Whigs, and Free Soilers had rallied all over the North to protest the Kansas-Nebraska Act, often using names like the People’s Party or the Union Party. In July 1854, one state-level gathering in Michigan adopted a platform that called slavery a “relic of barbarism,” cheered defiance of the Fugitive Slave Act, and demanded the end of slavery’s expansion. Stressing slavery’s threat to whites, the delegates proudly claimed the nation’s Revolutionary heritage. > “In view of the necessity of battling for the first principles of republican government, and against the schemes of aristocracy the most revolting and oppressive with which the earth was ever cursed,” they concluded, “we will co-operate and be known as Republicans until the contest be terminated.” The new name caught on, and the Republican Party spread rapidly across the North in 1854 and 1855, absorbing other anti-Nebraska groups and often supplanting the Whigs where the Know-Nothings lacked support. From the beginning, Republicans concentrated on the North and made no effort to attract southern votes or appease southern interests. Their bedrock demand was an end to the expansion of slavery into the territories. Some Republicans also denounced the injustice of slavery for blacks, but all agreed that it gave unfair advantages to slaveholders and allowed them to deny opportunity to other whites. Cut off from the bounty of the West, party orators went on, ordinary white Americans would fall into urban poverty and class op- --- pression, ending the promise of the republic and its free labor ideals. Republicans agreed that the federal government had no constitutional power to abolish slavery in the states, but they joyfully predicted its collapse if expansion only stopped. Slavery and free labor had created antagonistic social structures and rival economic aspirations in each section. Many on both sides agreed that southern slavery encouraged agriculture over industry, while the northern economy fostered workshops, cities, and wage labor in addition to numerous family farms. Fearing that the freewheeling northern economy would slowly squeeze family farmers into industrial work, the South’s defenders praised slavery as the protector of white men’s liberties and denounced “free labor” as a euphemism for permanent “wage slavery” for white men, women, and children alike. From the opposite perspective, Free Soilers insisted that slavery oppressed ordinary white families, first because the ownership of slaves gave masters an insurmountable economic advantage, and second because the association of slavery with hard work tainted the dignity of labor. As a New York Republican described the South’s common whites, “They are depressed, poor, impoverished, degraded in caste, because labor is degraded.” The elections of 1854 brought 108 anti-Nebraska candidates to Congress, many of them avowed Republicans and all of them potential recruits. Key newspapers embraced the movement, including the formerly Whig *New York Tribune* and the *New York Evening Post*, once a tower of strength for the Democrats. Regional leaders like the Whigs William H. Seward of New York, Benjamin Wade of Ohio, and Abraham Lincoln of Illinois voiced their support, joined by prominent Free Soilers and antislavery Democrats like Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, Salmon P. Chase of Ohio, and John P. Hale of New Hampshire. No party had a majority when Congress assembled in 1855, but after many ballots, the House chose Republican Nathaniel Banks of New York as its Speaker. For most of 1854 and 1855, Republicans and Know-Nothings vied to replace the Whigs as the principal opponents of northern Democrats. Several factors finally tipped the balance to the Republicans. Many native-born Americans rejected the Know-Nothings’ bigotry. Foreign-born Protestants could dislike Catholics but still reject nativism and Know-Nothings, a liability when every vote counted. Once in office, moreover, Know-Nothings could rarely satisfy their followers’ demands for radical measures against “subversive” influences and seemed as ineffective as the party hacks they replaced. --- Fundamentally, the slavery issue proved more powerful than nativist debates. When the American Party endorsed the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1856, northerners bolted from its convention, dubbed themselves the "North Americans," and chose their own presidential candidate. Rushing to pick up the pieces, Republicans wooed unhappy Know-Nothings with coalition tickets, temperance legislation, and nativist platform planks, recognizing them as like-minded foes of the Democrats whose party loyalties were still fluid. After losing the 1856 elections, the American Party declined rapidly as most of its northern supporters joined the Republicans. ### THE FIRE-EATERS RESPOND The rise of the Republicans seriously frightened white southerners. Few believed that Republicans only intended to prevent the growth of slavery and would not interfere where it already existed. Even if Republicans kept their promises, however, southerners agreed that an end of slavery’s expansion would indeed doom it everywhere. With the federal government in antislavery hands, moreover, who could predict the consequences? Would Republicans enforce the Fugitive Slave Act or preserve slavery in the nation’s capital? Would they abolish the interstate slave trade or open the mails to abolitionists? Would previously docile slaves, unnaturally stirred by white abolitionists, rise in revolt? Even if they did not, who could dare to take the chance? As Republicans grew steadily after 1854, the task of a southern politician grew increasingly simple: promise the voters a credible plan to keep them from power. Anxious southern voters did not form a new party but sympathized increasingly with southern rights extremists and avowed secessionists. In the Deep South, many Whigs left their party for the Democrats and gave their former rivals a near monopoly of power. In 1848, for example, Deep South voters had given Whig slaveholder Zachary Taylor almost half their presidential votes, but the Whig share dropped to 35 percent in 1852, when Winfield Scott refused to endorse the Compromise of 1850. Southern Whigs almost disappeared after 1854, when northern Whigs outraged the South by rejecting the Kansas-Nebraska Act and its repeal of the Missouri Compromise. In the Upper South, geographical divisions allowed some Whigs to survive by using the American Party label to represent upland yeomen against lowland planters, but this tactic did not work in the Deep South, where slavery was more widespread and Democrats had always been stronger. When --- southern Know-Nothingism could not stem the Democratic tide, the region’s moderates stopped looking for a party label and simply called themselves “the Opposition.” Their own strategy for thwarting the Republicans was to downplay their appeal, seek cooperation with northern conservatives, and assure the voters that quick defeat at the next election would follow any temporary Republican success. The Democratic Party had long been popular in the South, and it grew even stronger after 1854. Southern Democrats only picked up two congressional seats that year, but the loss of 66 northern Democrats gave them much more influence in national party councils and seemed to lift a lid on sectional extremism. Prior to the Mexican War, for example, few southern office seekers openly endorsed secession, or withdrawal from the Union, but fire-eaters took a leading role in debating the future of slavery in the territories and made the idea ever more respectable. Joined by some others in the Deep South, for example, South Carolina threatened to secede in response to the Compromise of 1850. Regional leaders defused the movement by endorsing the “Georgia Platform,” a far more radical program than southerners once supported, and pledged secession if Congress took any more steps against slavery in the territories. As the Republican Party grew stronger in the North, moreover, secessionist threats from southern Democrats grew louder. Former Alabama congressman William Lowndes Yancey, for example, joined Robert Barnwell Rhett, editor of the *Charleston Mercury*, in calling explicitly for secession in 1850 and organizing Southern Rights Associations to spread their views. The movement faltered but the two leading fire-eaters spent the remainder of the 1850s agitating for a separate southern nation. By the end of the decade, Yancey was calling openly for a federal slave code and reopening the African slave trade, and accused less radical leaders of being traitors to the South, while Rhett demanded immediate secession if the Republicans elected the president in 1860. ### "BLEEDING KANSAS" Events in the new western territories favored Republican growth. Immediately after the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, opponents of the new law announced a drive to populate Kansas with antislavery settlers who would vote to preserve free soil. “We will engage in competition for the virgin soil of Kansas,” promised New York senator --- William H. Seward, "and God give the victory to the side which is stronger in numbers as it is in right." The New England Emigrant Aid Society quickly organized to lead the effort, but proslavery forces were just as determined to stop them. "If we win we carry slavery to the Pacific Ocean," Missouri senator David Atchison predicted. "If we fail we lose Missouri Arkansas Texas and all the territories." Most early Kansans were nonslaveholders from the border states. Their greatest desire was cheap land and a fresh start, and they probably lacked strong feelings about slavery. Distrusting their ambivalence, Senator Atchison's hard-drinking, pistol-packing "border ruffians" left nothing to chance and decided to jam the polling places. At the first territorial election, officials counted twice as many votes as the number of bona fide voters and installed an overwhelmingly proslavery legislature. Once in office, these fraudulently elected lawmakers expelled the antislavery minority and adopted a draconian slave code that made antislavery speech a felony and imposed the death penalty for aiding a fugitive slave. Mindful of his southern supporters, President Pierce ignored these widespread abuses and replaced the governor who complained about them. Despairing of official justice, the antislavery settlers then called their own convention and formed another government. By January 1856, Kansas had two competing legislatures, each claiming to be the sole legitimate government of the territory. These events inspired Massachusetts Republican Charles Sumner to deliver his scorching condemnation of "the Crime against Kansas" in the Senate and led to his caning by Preston Brooks. Almost simultaneously, news arrived in Washington that proslavery forces had attacked the antislavery town of Lawrence, Kansas, on May 21, 1856, destroying two newspaper offices, a hotel, and the homes and stores of prominent citizens. President Pierce ignored both affairs, but the twin incidents convinced thousands of horrified northerners that proslavery forces would never respect the rights of their opponents, and only Republicans would stand up to their outrages. Out on the plains of Kansas, a zealous abolitionist named John Brown responded to the "sack of Lawrence" with an act of violent revenge. Joined by four of his sons and one son-in-law, Brown conducted a midnight raid on May 24–25, 1856, kidnapped five proslavery inhabitants from their homes along Pottawatomie Creek, and hacked them to death with broadswords. In the polarized