districts. To reach America, Palatines sailed down the Rhine River to Rotterdam and booked passage for Philadelphia, the largest colonial port. If their funds ran low, passengers borrowed from the ship’s captain, hoping to find a friend or relative to redeem them in Pennsylva- --- Many of the new arrivals became urban artisans, common laborers, or domestic servants, but more purchased land from private speculators or Pennsylvania’s proprietor and began their own farms. They usually settled near kinfolk, creating German-speaking ethnic enclaves across the countryside. Preserving a non-English culture provoked resentments that would frequently recur in the American immigrant experience. “Why should the Palatine Boors [i.e., peasants] be suffered to swarm into our settlements,” grumbled Benjamin Franklin, “and by herding together establish their languages and manners to the exclusion of ours?” Such sentiments encouraged the growth of ethnic blocs in Pennsylvania politics, another recurrent pattern. Corrupting *Deutsch* (the German word for “German”), Anglo-Americans called the Palatines “Dutch,” and their descendants are still known as the “Pennsylvania Dutch.” An estimated 66,000 Protestant settlers from northern Ireland joined the Germans in Pennsylvania and the other mainland colonies. Their journey to America had begun in the early seventeenth century when King James I had seized the lands of Irish Catholic rebels, especially in the northern province of Ulster, and awarded them to followers who promised to settle them with Protestant tenants. Thousands of Scottish Presbyterians soon crossed over to Ireland, rented small plots in Ulster, and battled the dispossessed Catholics for control of the territory. England had sponsored these immigrants but discriminated against Presbyterians as well as Catholics, taxing all inhabitants to support the Anglican Church, reserving lands, offices, and even university enrollments for Anglicans, and even denying the validity of Presbyterian weddings. Ulster Protestants endured these burdens and initially prospered by raising flax and making linen. When landlords raised rents and the linen business faltered, first after 1720 and again after 1750, thousands left Ulster for Pennsylvania, where they came to be known as the Scots-Irish on account of their dual heritage. Europeans came more slowly to other colonial empires. In 1660, the 58,000 inhabitants of British North America far outnumbered the 6,000 residents of New France, for example. Both New France and Louisiana claimed the vast river drainages, with small numbers of French downstream and Indians controlling the interior. French authorities ruthlessly suppressed and exploited the “little nations” who preceded them on the Gulf coast of Louisiana but upstream on --- the Mississippi and the St. Lawrence, both colonial governments respected Indian sovereignty and depended on Indian allies to maintain their supposed authority. The settlers of New France rented small farms from noble landowners and raised grains and livestock in the short growing season. Louisiana faced additional challenges from heat, floods, hurricanes, and tropical diseases. Over 5,000 whites and 6,000 slaves came to the colony before 1730, but a combined attack by slaves and Natchez Indians killed 10 percent of the population in 1729. As in the Carolinas, the French settlers could not defeat these enemies alone, but used lavish presents to get help from the Choctaws. Their combined forces then killed or enslaved most of the Natchez, scattering the survivors to other southeastern tribes. In the aftermath, no more than 2,000 whites and 4,000 Africans remained in Louisiana, growing indigo and tobacco that sold poorly. Unlike the French sugar islands, both New France and Louisiana languished and their revenues never matched expenses. In addition to the uncounted Indians who remained independent, the population of New Spain grew vigorously in the eighteenth century, from 1.5 million in 1650 to nearly 5 million in 1790—roughly a million more than the infant United States in the same year. Most of this growth came from Indian and *mestizo* families who survived the earlier epidemics. In Florida, however, the non-Indian Spanish presence dwindled to small garrisons at St. Augustine and Pensacola, and its other borderland settlements were not much larger. ### THE EXPANSION OF SLAVERY Africans came to Virginia as early as 1619, but white servants outnumbered them before 1700. According to current estimates, about 12 million Africans boarded the slave ships in Africa but only 10 million reached the Americas alive, about half of them in the eighteenth century. In all, about half a million came to British North America and the United States, three-fifths of them before 1775. Much about Virginia’s first Africans remains uncertain. Most apparently came from the Caribbean and not directly from Africa. They knew something about European culture and often bore Portuguese and Spanish names like Antonio or Driggus (from Rodriguez), so they may have been baptized Catholics. Some remained slaves for life, but others gained their freedom quickly and may have been released like other servants. Court records show that early slaves and free blacks --- lived about like other servants—drinking, gambling, thieving, having sex, and running away with their English fellows as if there were few differences between them. Free Africans had fewer rights than the English, but they could still hold property, marry black or white spouses, go to court, testify against whites, and enjoy freedom in ways that later black generations could only dream about. Conditions worsened after 1660, as planters sought new sources of labor. Indentured servants were increasing in price and decreasing in number, as poor British workers found better opportunities at home. A limited number of Indian slaves were available, but they still suffered badly from diseases and they might help their tribesmen during attacks. Soon after Bacon’s Rebellion, however, the Royal African Company started shipping as many as 5,000 captives a year to the West Indies and the Chesapeake, at prices American planters could afford. Virginia’s plantation owners soon began shifting from servants to slaves. Small planters in Virginia and Maryland still grew tobacco with their own hands and purchased indentured servants when they could, but by 1700, most tobacco workers were probably black. Slavery also flourished on the rice plantations of South Carolina. Rice became a valuable export to the Caribbean and southern Europe, but it required frequent flooding, and constant heavy labor was necessary to build and maintain dikes and sluices and to tend the crop in mud and stagnant water. White South Carolinians bought so many slaves for this work that their colony contained a black majority by 1708, and its centers of rice cultivation contained as many as ten Africans for every white. Slavery scarcely existed in England, so colonial assemblies established it with new laws that defined slaves as personal, or chattel, property, and stripped them of rights that belonged to the poorest Englishman. In Virginia, the first clear distinction between slaves and free servants came in a statute of 1661. “That in case any English servant shall run away in company with any negroes who are incapable of making satisfaction by the addition of time,” the House of Burgesses declared, *“Bee it enacted* that the English so running away . . . shall serve for the time of the said negroes absence.” The assembly presumed, in other words, that Africans’ terms could not be extended since they already served for life. A year later, the House of Burgesses reversed English custom and decreed that children would inherit the status of their mothers, not their fathers, so enslaved mothers’ children were enslaved as well. Masters could thus increase their slaveholdings by --- impregnating female slaves. In 1669, the assembly acknowledged that slavery rested on violence, and protected masters by ruling that any slave’s death “from the extremity of . . . correction” must be deemed an accident, for murder required an intent to kill and no one would destroy his property on purpose. The need for repression was so great, in other words, that masters got permission to whip their slaves without limit, even to death. The greatest number of slaves came from West Central Africa, where the states of Gabon, Congo, and Angola are today, followed by those from the Bight of Biafra, just to the south of the Niger River, and the Bight of Benin to its west. As with Venture Smith, Africans seized most of the victims and sold them to whites along the coast, allowing kingdoms like Ashanti, Dahomey, and Benin to rise and flourish on profits from the trade. One king received £250,000 in 1750, five times the income of the richest English nobleman. The leading European traders came from Britain, Portugal, and France, and usually supplied their own nations’ colonies. Captives who survived a kidnapping raid and the brutal march to the African coast were chained and packed together “spoonways” in the holds of slave ships with as little as five feet between floors. The ships carried between 250 and 600 people, who suffered in unbearable filth and stench during a the Middle Passage, which could last for two or three months, before reaching a colonial port such as Charles Town or Savannah. ### NATIVE AMERICANS AND COLONIAL EXPANSION By 1700, coastal tribes like the Powhatans and the Wampanoags had nearly vanished, and survivors had submitted to English authority. Living as inconspicuously as possible, they quietly farmed in unwanted places like swamps and sandy wastes, sometimes selling pottery, baskets, or game, and occasionally working for pay. Farther inland, some of the larger Indian societies began to recover their numbers in the eighteenth century, partly by absorbing survivors from smaller groups. In the Southeast, tribes such as the Creeks, Cherokees, Choctaws, and Chickasaws occupied wide territories beyond the limits of white occupation and held the balance of power among the British, French, and Spanish empires. In a counterpart to the French Canadian fur trade, they conducted a lively trade in deerskins with South Carolina merchants, selling as many as 53,000 hides a year for weapons, cloth, and alcohol. --- The Iroquois Confederacy of New York was an especially powerful network with a crucial role in diplomacy and the fur trade. Brought together by Chief Hiawatha in the late fifteenth century, the Five Nations included the Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Seneca tribes, and occupied the strategic corridor in western New York that connected the Hudson River to Lake Erie and the Ohio Valley. After defeat in North Carolina, the related Tuscarora tribe migrated north to become the sixth member of the confederacy in 1722. Controlling the fur trade of the eastern Great Lakes, the Iroquois expanded by collecting captives and tribute from weaker tribes to their south and west. Iroquois dealings with Britain and France illustrate the methods of Indian diplomacy. When the English acquired New York, the Five Nations maintained their independence, but as they had with the Dutch, they joined the newcomers in an alliance called the Covenant Chain. Over time, various treaties formalized this relationship between Britain and the Iroquois, and recognized the confederacy as the dominant power in western New York and the Great Lakes basin. The allies of the Covenant Chain thus squared off against New France and its own Indian allies in the upper country, often using diplomacy instead of war to assert themselves. When France used gifts and trade to counteract Iroquois power over weaker tribes, for example, the Six Nations made friendly overtures to Britain, France, and their respective Indian allies, neutralized potential opposition, and then overpowered the Shawnees, Delawares, and other tribes of the Ohio Valley. Iroquois agents, or half kings, remained with subordinate tribes to oversee trade and external relations. Avoiding dependence on either empire, the Iroquois offered benefits to both Britain and France by allowing the British to trade in the Ohio country and the French to travel through it to Louisiana. When colonial wars broke out, the Iroquois tried to stay neutral, but when that failed, they gave nominal support to Britain while quietly encouraging France. At the height of its power in 1744, the confederacy granted land (which it did not really control) to Virginia in exchange for access to the Cherokees and Catawbas, hoping to reduce them to vassalage as well. Unfortunately for the Six Nations, Virginia took far more land than the confederacy intended to give, and used its advantage to open the upper Ohio Valley to its land speculators. Until then, the Iroquois continued to dominate the territory bounded by the Hudson and Ohio Rivers and the Great Lakes, while Britain and France each courted their favor. --- Elsewhere on the continent, Creeks, Cherokees, Choctaws, and the Indians of New France used similar tactics to safeguard their independence by pitting one European power against another. In the words of one New York negotiator, “To preserve the balance between us and the French is the great ruling principle of the modern Indian politics.” Though the large native states of Mesoamerica and the Andes had quickly lost independence to the sixteenth-century Spanish, North American Indians used a combination of war and diplomacy to control as much as three-quarters of their continent through the 1780s. # The South as a Slave Society Historians of slavery make a distinction between slave societies, where slavery dominates the economy and other institutions, and societies with slaves, where slavery is just one of several kinds of labor. In this sense, both South Carolina and the Chesapeake colonies became slave societies by about 1700. Coastal areas of North Carolina and Georgia soon followed, but their upland regions were societies with slaves for much longer. Northern colonies were also societies with slaves, though blacks were 12 percent of New York’s population in 1770, 7 percent of New Jersey’s, and 6 percent of Rhode Island’s. ### LIFE IN BONDAGE There was a very important difference between slavery in North America and slavery in the colonies farther south. In the sugar islands, most slaves were men who died young, and continuous imports were available to replace them. In most parts of the eighteenth-century mainland, however, enslaved women were more numerous, so the slave population began to grow by natural increase, or an excess of births over deaths. In one 50-year period, for example, 150,000 Africans came to Barbados but its slave population only rose by 28,000. At about the same time, Virginia imported 100,000 Africans but its slave force rose from 10,000 to 100,000. These differences arose from cold calculations. Wealthy sugar planters could afford to pay high prices for enslaved men, overwork them, and replace the dead or disabled with fresh purchases, knowing that a mostly male workforce would yield higher profits than one composed of men and women who would need years of milder and costlier treatment to reproduce themselves. Tobacco plantations were less lucra- --- tive, so mainland masters had to buy at least one woman for every two men, pay to protect their lives and health, support child-rearing, and add new workers from the ranks of their children. Planters also realized that men with wives and children would be less troublesome than bachelors. One spoke realistically in 1769: > I Shd. Be obliged . . . to render the Negroes I now have happy and contented, wch I know they cannot be without having each a Wife. This will greatly tend to keep them at home and to make them Regular and tho the Women will not work all together so well as ye Men, Yet Amends will be sufficiently made in a very few years by the Great Encrease of Children. Slave owners were not always farsighted, and shocked travelers reported that slaves often lacked adequate food, clothing, and shelter. Poorer masters were less generous than affluent ones, and did not own enough slaves for them all to find spouses nearby. The law did not recognize slave marriages, moreover, so enslaved families had no protection from sale or sexual abuse. But as more and more masters learned the value of a growing workforce, they provided more basic material necessities. Modest improvements never eased the fundamental brutality of bondage, and slaves resisted their condition whenever possible. Shipboard rebellions happened often enough to keep captains and crews on their guard at all times, and some captives committed suicide rather than submit. Slaves made persistent efforts to escape the plantations. Known as maroons, some found refuge in remote swamps or other hidden places, where they re-created African-style communities and conducted occasional raids on white settlements. These communities were especially significant in colonies with accessible hideouts and large numbers of Africans, such as Jamaica and Brazil, but they also took shape in the Carolina swamplands. When escape seemed impossible, day-to-day resistance could take the form of feigning sick, breaking tools, or working poorly. In America, well-armed whites usually outnumbered the slaves, so overt rebellions were unlikely to succeed. When Spanish authorities in St. Augustine offered freedom to runaway slaves from the English colonies, however, some 20 Angolans on South Carolina’s Stono River somehow heard the news and launched a strike for freedom in 1739. Killing about 20 whites who stood in their way, the original band re- --- cruited between 60 and 100 others to make a break for Florida, before being crushed by a massive white counterattack. Louisiana’s Natchez Revolt took 200 whites lives in 1729, and the colony stagnated when the danger persisted. Even while they resisted, African Americans slowly forged their own culture, using their own versions of English with African words and grammatical features. At first, whites made few efforts to convert them to Christianity, but Africans used charms and magic to influence natural forces and made no sharp distinctions between the sacred and the secular. Like their African forebears, African Americans included highly rhythmic music in the tasks of everyday life and kept a place for African instruments like the banjo and the drum. Throughout the Americas, slaves punctuated their worship and their work rhythms with the call-and-response pattern of West African singing in which a leader offers a phrase or a sentiment to a group and the group replies by reinforcing or amplifying the leader’s theme. Cultural roots in Africa would sustain and anchor the African American community throughout the brutal centuries ahead. ### MASTERS IN A SLAVE SOCIETY For whites, the spread of slavery reinforced a social structure that already existed by the time of Bacon’s Rebellion and reflected patterns on the sugar islands. In the Chesapeake and the Carolinas, a small group of wealthy planter gentry owned most slaves and the best land. Middling farmers bought slaves when they could. A much larger group of common whites, many of them poor ex-servants, struggled to find their own farms, often in hillier or less fertile districts far from the coast. The great planters dominated society wherever slavery flourished. In Virginia, for example, Robert “King” Carter used marriage, inheritance, and political appointments to get his start in tobacco planting, land speculation, and the slave trade, and he died owning 300,000 acres, over 1,000 slaves, and £10,000 in cash. His sons Landon Carter and Robert Carter III were almost equally wealthy and prominent. Patriarchs of the “first families of Virginia,” including the Randolphs, Beverleys, and Lees, ruled their county courts and vestries, filled the House of Burgesses and Governor’s Council, and supplied generations of leaders to Virginia and the United States. Elite families often intermarried to build up fortunes and networks --- of powerful kin. Virginia law followed primogeniture and awarded a father’s land to his oldest son unless a will directed otherwise. Owners could also entail their lands to prevent heirs from selling or subdividing them. Sometimes educating their sons in England, planters used impressive houses, the finest furnishings, elaborate entertainments, and polished manners to display their wealth and claim superior status. Like many successful elites, the Virginia gentry often had roughhewn origins and could make room for some talented newcomers, so lesser planters hoped for the educational opportunities or the advantageous match that might place one of their own children in the ranks of their colony’s upper crust. Farther to the south, in the rice and indigo country of South Carolina and Georgia, leading families like the Rutledges, Middletons, and Pinckneys surpassed even the Virginians in their wealth and flourishes. To avoid the danger of malaria on their swampy plantations, the lowcountry rice planters built townhouses in nearby Charles Town, where they enjoyed races, balls, and matchmaking in a fashionable social season. Unable to equal this display of elegance, aspiring Georgians strove to imitate it in their own capital of Savannah, and the even less prosperous North Carolinians tried their best in coastal villages like Wilmington and New Bern. Colonel William Byrd II of Virginia vividly illustrates the achievements, frustrations, and vices of the planter aristocracy. After a polished education in England, Byrd entered the House of Burgesses at the age of 22. Rebuffed when he courted an English heiress, he married the daughter of a planter and imperial official who promised the couple £1,000, and later inherited his father’s hundreds of slaves and thousands of acres. Byrd adorned his plantation with Westover, an elegant brick mansion whose symmetrical lines and balanced proportions perfectly embodied the aesthetic ideals of his era. Though hugely rich and successful, Byrd chafed at his colonial status and longed to enter the English aristocracy or to win appointment as governor of Virginia. He never achieved either goal.