inoculation against smallpox. Though he feared witches sincerely and supported the Salem witchcraft trials (see below), Mather’s scientific writings won him election to the Royal Society, England’s prestigious scientific association. (Benjamin Franklin and William Byrd II also belonged.) Like his father and grandfathers, Cotton Mather longed for weighty political as well as religious influence on the larger society around him, but he never reached their eminence of unchallenged authority. By the time of his death in 1728, the Puritan legacy had loosened its grip on New England, but remained a powerful influence on its broader culture. ## WITCHCRAFT IN SALEM Certainly the most dramatic and tragic illustration of New England’s tendency to see change as the work of the devil burst out in a fearful campaign against witches in Salem Village, now Danvers, Massachusetts. The trouble began in 1691, when several neighborhood girls fell to mumbling in strange fits and trances. Pressed by adults around them, the “afflicted girls” began to accuse older, unmarried, or unpopular women of sending invisible spirits to torment them. Arrests and trials only seemed to make the problem worse, and over the course of 1692, almost 200 people in eastern Massachusetts were accused of consorting with the devil. During the same period, 14 women and 5 men were hanged for the crime of witchcraft and another man died under torture. --- Like most of their contemporaries, Salem Villagers did not doubt that Satan could grant terrible powers to those who served him. They saw women as especially susceptible to his allure, just as Eve had been vulnerable in the Garden of Eden, and they particularly suspected widows and spinsters. Many believed that Satan worked harder to bewitch New England, for the Puritans had captured his former domain for God’s commonwealth. New Englanders tried far more accused witches than other colonial Americans, but only Salem saw mass executions. Massachusetts faced unusual pressures in 1692. The Glorious Revolution had just stripped the colony of its independence and cherished charter. Many doubted the legitimacy of Sir William Phips, King William’s appointed governor. England and France were still fighting King William’s War, and France’s Indian allies were attacking New England’s northern frontiers. Frightened villagers could thus see the devil’s handiwork all around them. Still more subtle factors may have played their part. Salem Village was an agricultural hamlet that lacked the prosperity of nearby Salem Town. Most of the accused witches were somehow connected—often in inferior or dependent roles—to families who shared in Salem Town’s wealth and far-flung connections. Town and village factions had recently quarreled about their minister—whose daughter and niece were the first to be afflicted. Did accusers unconsciously blame Salem’s mysterious success on black magic? Did they try to strike back by attacking their rivals’ wives and servants? We cannot be sure at this distance, but it is tempting to think so. Certainly no one in 1692 dared to say that the charges were inherently absurd. Increase Mather, Cotton Mather, and other eminent ministers cautioned against the misuse of evidence but warned authorities to take the charges seriously. As investigations continued, most of the accused sought safety by naming alleged accomplices who ranked higher and higher up the social scale. Governor Phips finally called a halt when someone accused his wife. He suspended the trials and executions and freed the remaining prisoners. Belief in witchcraft did not vanish overnight, but most of the colony’s leaders soon realized they had made a terrible mistake. Future concern about the tension between Christian devotion and worldly success in New England would not take the form of a witch-hunt but may have encouraged a major religious revival in the 1740s. --- # Social and Cultural Trends As the eighteenth-century colonies grew and diversified, social and cultural developments influenced popular ideas, customs, and beliefs, and often crossed regional lines to build up a widely shared culture. Ideas about families and gender, race, and the social order were especially important to this process. At the same time, Americans shared in the cultural and intellectual life of the Atlantic basin. Wealthy and well-educated colonists embraced the ideas of the European Enlightenment, which honored science and reason and stressed the perfectibility of human nature. Others concluded that eighteenth-century society had lost its religious bearings and called for repentance and personal transformation. A revival movement known as the Great Awakening swept the colonies, splitting old denominations, revitalizing personal piety, and encouraging ordinary Christians to decide religious questions themselves. The Enlightenment and the Awakening would both have important roles in the future of American culture. ## Free Women and Families Immigration was one major source of colonial growth; families were the other. The first settlers of New England and the middle colonies came in family groups that included men, women, and children. Women were scarce in the early Chesapeake, but sex ratios were nearly even by 1700, and both African Americans and whites began growing by natural increase. The family or household was the fundamental unit of free society in the colonies. Almost every free person married, and lived with their parents before then. Most economic activity took place on family farms or in workshops within the owner’s home. A “family” in these circumstances usually consisted of a married couple, their unmarried children, and their servants, apprentices, and slaves. While he lived, the father had legal authority over his dependents. He owned the family’s labor, earnings, and property, and minor children could not “rob” him by moving away without permission. The father represented the family in all its relations with outsiders, and authorities could hold him responsible for his household’s behavior. Fathers even carried out government functions, as some were paid through taxes to care for orphans or needy adults, for example. English law subordinated women to men, especially inside the --- family, and conventional wisdom taught that women were the weaker sex both intellectually and morally. Women could not vote, hold office, sit on juries, or serve in the militia. The moment she married, even a technically free woman became a *feme covert* ("covered" or "hidden woman") whose husband absorbed her civil existence. She could be tried and punished for a crime, but she could no longer control property, transact business, make a contract, write a will, obtain credit, or make any legally valid decision for herself. Courts almost always defended a husband’s authority, even in cases of gross mistreatment or desertion, and it was nearly impossible for a wife to take control of her earnings or her children from an abusive or absent husband. A widow could use one-third of her husband’s land until she died or remarried. It then reverted to his heirs (usually his sons), so she could not sell it or bequeath it as she chose. Divorce usually required a special act of the assembly when it was possible at all, and the husband normally received custody of his children. Though harsh laws and customs governed the lives of free women, enslaved women lived far more harshly, with no recognition of their marriages or other legal protections. A free widow or adult single woman had the legal status of a *feme sole*, which allowed her to acquire property and do business as if she were male. In extraordinary cases of desertion or abuse, assemblies might grant *feme sole* status to a wife, with the right to hold property and run her own household but not remarry. Prenuptial agreements could safeguard the property rights of heiresses, but these were rare. Free colonial couples could not easily marry without the resources to form their own households. Except among the poor, groom’s families were expected to provide land for a farm while the bride’s father gave cash or equipment. It took fathers time to accumulate these goods, so in the mid-eighteenth century, the average age at first marriage was about 26 or 27 for men and 22 for women. Poorer couples had less reason to wait and married somewhat earlier. Once married, a woman’s duty was to bear as many children as possible. Her first child usually followed the wedding within a year and more followed at intervals of two or three years until her death or menopause. In New England, where information is most reliable, most wives bore about seven or eight children and reared about five or six to adulthood, if they escaped the serious danger of death in childbirth. Colonial children were an economic asset, performing small tasks as early as six or seven and working seriously from the time they were young teenagers until their own marriages. Large families, longer life- --- spans, and continued immigration caused the American population to double almost every 25 years. A woman’s labor was as important as her ability to bear children. Like slaves and servants, poor free women performed hard field labor like hoeing and reaping. Even when mothers were spared from the field, caring for numerous children could be endless and exhausting work. Most housewives were also responsible for cleaning, spinning, and making and mending clothes, as well as cooking and preserving food by drying, pickling, and fermenting. Farm women also cared for milk cows, poultry, and kitchen gardens, and turned milk into cheese and butter. Wealthy families had slaves or servants for household labor and childcare but wives had to supervise their work. The sale of eggs, butter, cheese, and soap could become a serious business for farm women who lived near urban markets. The wives of urban tradesmen or shopkeepers often helped with their husbands’ affairs, but while their husbands lived, law and custom usually kept them from going into business themselves. Widows might continue their husbands’ businesses, however, from a simple grocery to a more elaborate inn or workshop. Women could also keep small schools or use their sewing skills to make clothing or hats, but economic opportunities were still scarce outside of marriage. Those who never married faced dependent lives in the homes of relatives, and widows without means or prosperous relatives faced serious danger of poverty. Colonial children practiced the roles of adulthood by observing their parents and imitating them in small tasks, and their jobs became more demanding as they grew older. Some parents bound out their offspring as servants or apprentices by age 12 or younger, so they could learn their roles from less indulgent adults. Education for the poorest stopped there, but most learned simple literacy from their parents or from a teacher hired by neighboring families. Further schooling was deemed unnecessary for girls. Affluent or ambitious families might send their sons to more advanced academies, and a few of these attended one of the dozen or so colleges that appeared before 1775. The lives of eighteenth-century children may have changed more than those of their mothers. In the seventeenth century, strict Calvinists taught that even infants were inherently sinful, so the parents’ job was to break a child’s will and teach him or her obedience to human and divine authority. By contrast, the English philosopher John Locke, whose *Two Treatises of Government* had defended the Glorious Revolution, also published *An Essay Concerning Human Understanding* and --- *Thoughts on Education* in the 1690s, arguing that the human mind began as a “blank slate” that could be trained to good or evil. He encouraged parents to be loving and patient with their children, to avoid physical punishment, and to teach them by good example. Over the course of the eighteenth century, wealthy and well-educated parents grew increasingly receptive to such advice and seemed to soften their strictness with more indulgence and open affection. Love for the unique personality of each child likewise spread among the gentry and gradually seeped downward. The respect for individual rights that later became so important in American public life may have had psychological roots in the changing eighteenth-century family. ### DEFINING RACE Early modern Englishmen had gloried in their own nation and often looked down on everyone else, so their views of the Indians, the Irish, the French, and the Spanish were uniformly negative. These low opinions did not depend on concepts of race, because they rarely distinguished between inherent inferiority (which could not change) and cultural inferiority (which might). When comparing themselves to Indians, for example, seventeenth-century settlers usually spoke of “Christians” and “savages” instead of colors like “white” and “red.” All the same, the English could treat the Indians as especially different, inferior, and naturally deserving of violence, as when a roving party of Virginians reportedly amused themselves by “shoteinge owtt [the] Braynes” of Indian children. In other words, early English settlers did not clearly *think* in racial terms, and claimed to believe that Indians could improve themselves by adopting English customs, but they could *feel* and *act* in ways that later generations would recognize as racist. Over the course of the seventeenth century, these feelings and actions intensified, until we can speak of whites’ “racial” hostility to Indians, even without well-developed theories of race. African slavery encouraged the growth of ideas about race. English prejudice against Africans was especially strong, for black was the traditional color of the devil and a powerful synonym for “sinful,” “wicked,” and “base.” Perhaps as a result, early English voyagers did not hesitate to buy, sell, or steal Africans though enslaving Europeans never seems to have occurred to them. From the beginning, they also subjected African women to field labor more readily than whites. People in West Africa wore considerably less clothing than the --- Elizabethans, moreover, so startled explorers were quick to imagine that tropical sexuality was as heated as the climate. Viewing sex as a dark and bestial passion, they spread absurd stories of sex between apes and African women, and easily assumed that all Africans were somehow like animals. As early as the sixteenth century, European explorers began creating mental links among Africans, blackness, sexuality, and subhuman creatures that would have long and lethal consequences for African Americans. These early prejudices did not lead directly to slavery but helped convince the English that Africans were especially suited for it. If early prejudice helped justify enslavement, enslavement also deepened prejudice. The purchase of a human cargo, confinement belowdecks, brutal living conditions, and violent punishments were all part of enslavement. Such cruelties came easier when the perpetrators believed that their victims were innately inferior. John Woolman, an early Quaker critic of slavery and the slave trade, understood the process very well. "Placing on men the ignominious title slave," he reflected, "dressing them in uncomely garments, keeping them to servile labor, in which they are often dirty, tends gradually to fix a notion in the mind, that they are a sort of people below us in nature." Not all early colonists shared these convictions, for black and white servants mingled freely and sometimes intimately, and cooperated to resist their bondage. As decades passed, authorities fought these alliances and reinforced slavery by imposing legal inferiority on Africans, specifically because of their color. The new statutes defined blackness as a form of gross pollution, especially in connection with sex and mixed-race children. In 1664, for example, Maryland authorities denounced "freeborne English women [who] forgettful of their free Condicion and to the disgrace of our Nation doe intermarry with Negro Slaves." The Virginia assembly imposed its own ban on interracial marriage in 1691, condemning the "abominable mixture and spurious issue" that resulted. The laws also imposed a heavier penalty on free people who aided runaway slaves than on those who aided fugitive white servants, and devised increasingly bloody punishments for Africans who defied white authority. Legal discrimination reinforced prejudice and supported the belief that Africans were inherently inferior. Theorists would eventually spin this idea into elaborate concepts of race that ranked all human beings in color-based categories, with whites at the top, Africans at the bottom, and Indians somewhere between them. Long before then, --- however, powerful whites courted their poorer white neighbors with color-based privileges that offered a kind of equality across class lines. In other words, concepts of deep-seated racial identity and inferiority did not arise inevitably from physical differences among Indians, Africans, and Europeans. While prior prejudice played its role, whites began constructing race and racism from the practices of enslavement and conquest. ## RANK AND THE SOCIAL ORDER Seventeenth-century England was a steeply ranked society that extended from the king and a handful of titled aristocrats at the top, down through a larger class of gentry and urban merchants, and on through a mass of yeomen, shopkeepers, artisans, laborers, servants, and beggars. Status corresponded to wealth, power, education, personal refinement, and family connections, and no one expected America to be different. The leaders of Jamestown resisted Captain John Smith as a social climber, and Governor John Winthrop carefully reminded the passengers on the *Arbella* that “some must be . . . highe and eminent in power and dignitie[,] others meane and in subjeccion.” The original settlers of the English colonies saw rank as a crucial part of social order. Despite these expectations, wilderness tended to undermine the hierarchy that crossed the Atlantic. In the rough-and-tumble world of the early Chesapeake, men with strength and cunning might capture more land and labor than those with finer pedigrees, while Bacon’s followers looted the plantations of those who claimed unwarranted superiority. Without the violence of class rebellion, the unsettled economy of New England could also humble the distinguished and elevate the obscure. Puritan leaders tried to preserve traditional appearances with laws preventing upstarts from sporting lace and gold braid, but they could not freeze the economic order. As conditions stabilized in the eighteenth century, the American economy grew more rapidly than its population. While living standards improved for almost everyone, prosperity supported a firmer social and economic hierarchy. In the Chesapeake and South Carolina, successful planter families passed land, slaves, and status to their rising generations. Outside the South, the wealthiest men were merchants and shippers in Philadelphia, New York, Boston, and smaller ports. Whether they were landed magnates like William Byrd II, self- --- made businessmen like Benjamin Franklin, or respected ministers like Cotton Mather, established leaders were known as the "better sort of people" and enjoyed wealth, political power, and public recognition. Their families enjoyed deference, or voluntary respect and submission, from the lesser folk around them, and deference usually enabled social leaders to monopolize both elected and appointed public offices. Colonists reserved the words "lady" and "gentleman" for adults of the better sort, and only community leaders and their wives could claim the titles of "Mister" and "Mistress." Most Americans seem to have accepted social inequality as a fact of life. Conventional opinion took it for granted that some people should dominate the rest, so long as they respected the rights of those below them. To receive political power, a gentleman should have the respect and confidence of his community. He should also be affluent, well-educated, supportive of established religion, and distinguished for good taste in art, literature, conversation, and dress. As stable elites emerged in most colonies, the movement of English society across the Atlantic seemed more complete. At the opposite end of the social scale, some Americans suffered long-term poverty. Slaves were the poorest of all, for they did not even own themselves. Cities contained a permanently impoverished class of sailors, laborers, disabled people, and propertyless widows and their families. Rural districts also supported destitute inhabitants or forced penniless wanderers to move on. Even landowners could feel the pinch of inequality, especially in the older towns of New England, where fathers continued to divide their lands equally among their sons and average landholdings shrank from 150 acres in the seventeenth century to as few as 40 in the later eighteenth. Within the colonies as a whole, economic historians estimate that the richest tenth of free Americans owned half their society’s wealth while the poorest tenth owned .02 percent. If slaves are included among the propertyless, America’s poorer half owned only 3 percent of its wealth. Even so, the poorest Americans ate better and lived longer than their European counterparts, and escaped the disastrous famines that still brought dire suffering and starvation to many in the countries they left behind. Between the rich and the poor, land-owning yeoman farmers enjoyed higher incomes as they sold a growing surplus to local and Atlantic traders. American leaders had also spread political rights to lure more immigrants, giving average white men far more influence over their governments than elsewhere in the Western world. Foreign --- observers frequently commented that American society had fewer peaks and valleys than Europe’s. “The leveling principle here operates strongly and takes the lead,” remarked a typical Boston visitor in 1764. “Every body has property and every body knows it.” Though “every body” in America did not own property, better and wider opportunities for owning land and making a living clearly joined political protections and religious toleration to inspire the surge in colonial immigration. Economic growth allowed most free Americans to buy more goods. Especially after 1740, English workshops turned out greater and greater quantities of consumer products that ranged from ordinary cloth and tableware to more elaborate clocks, books, textiles, china, glass, silver, and other luxuries. In the consumer revolution, Americans snapped up these goods as eagerly as the English did, and drove up the value of British imports by 360 percent between 1740 and 1770. Up and down the social scale, Americans enjoyed the opportunity to make their lives more comfortable and more stylish, and to show off their refinement through elaborate social rituals like the proper way of serving tea. “There are zealous efforts in every single Person to imitate the person next above him, and in every Town to equal [the] next [highest] in Wealth, Popularity, and Politeness,” one writer protested in the Connecticut Courant of