ever idolized and almost worshipped by her dependents and beloved by her children, to whom no word ever sounds half so sweet as *mother* and for whom no place possesses half the charms of her *home,*" promised one proslavery author. Fond regards came at a high price, however. To fulfill the ideal of the "lady," planter women were expected to combine beauty, fashion, wealth, refinement, etiquette, charity, and submission with loving motherhood and efficient household management, all with effortless grace. Writing in the *Southern Literary Messenger,* a female teacher warned her pupils to practice unfailing "self-control, gentleness and benevolence of disposition, purity and rectitude of conduct, [and] courtesy and politeness of manner," especially within the family. More bluntly, George Fitzhugh declared that "woman, like children, has but one right and that is the right to protection," balanced by "the obligation to obey . . . her husband, lord, and master." No wonder that another leading Confederate insisted that "each Planter is in fact a Patriarch—his position compels him to be a ruler in his own household." In the spirit of republican motherhood, female academies spread across the South in the post-Revolutionary generation so future mothers would be prepared to train their sons for leadership. The best of these schools joined sound academic education with instruction in polite accomplishments like music, needlework, and French, as *DeBow’s Review* explained, "to improve their [students’] minds and manners without robbing them of . . . delicacy and refinement." In late adolescence, parents might halt formal schooling at any time for a round of balls and social engagements designed to introduce young ladies to society and lead them to the most important decision of their lives—the choice of husband. Antebellum families allowed a free choice in these matters, but did their best to ensure that young people found partners with similar backgrounds, education, and wealth. To avoid the extensive division of estates, some families encouraged children to marry their first or second cousins. To safeguard the land and slaves that fathers often gave their daughters upon marriage (either from the son-in-law’s bad habits or bad luck), Mississippi passed the first law protecting a married woman’s property from her husbands’ debts in 1839, and some other southern states did likewise. Once married, plantation mistresses certainly enjoyed more opportunities than other women for leisure activities such as visiting, reading, or gardening, but most also faced the difficult responsibility of --- running a plantation household. Slaves performed the hardest parts of cooking, preserving food, cleaning, sewing, weaving, health care, and childcare, but like masters and overseers, mistresses faced steady resistance from unwilling workers. Protected from housework since childhood, many new brides struggled to control slaves and operate large households efficiently. The letters and diaries of planter women clearly show that they often felt lonely and overwhelmed, and longed for the company of friends and relatives, but the far distances that prevailed in rural society made visits as rare as they were welcome. Unlike urban businessmen, planters did not leave home for the working day. Ruling their homes as well as their fields, they routinely called their dependents “our family, black and white.” Southern women learned the ideas of “true womanhood” from the same books and magazines as their northern counterparts, but they did not have the same opportunity to rule their homes as a “separate sphere” or to claim the moral authority that encouraged reform activities among some northern women. When they could, however, many southern women from all classes embraced the Second Great Awakening and threw themselves into church work. The Presbyterian and Methodist denominations remained popular with the elite, but Methodists and Baptists attracted members from all classes, including slaves, middling white women, and plantation mistresses. Urban women could undertake benevolent activities through Sunday schools, Bible and tract societies, orphanages, poor relief, and religious missions, and they also pressed for public schools in cities such as Charleston, Mobile, and Natchez. Even so, the early women’s rights movement found no public echo in the antebellum South. Despite the prerogatives of patriarchy, some planter women enjoyed the loving marriages praised in ladies’ magazines. “Thank God for the unity of spirit which exists between Patrick and myself,” wrote one. “With him I am really better, more sensible, more entertaining than I am to any other mortal besides.” Unluckier wives raged helplessly against their husbands’ infidelities and vented their feelings on enslaved victims. “Patsey wept oftener, and suffered more, than any of her companions,” wrote former slave Solomon Northup of his master’s sexual victim. “Nothing delighted the mistress more than to see her suffer. . . . To be rid of Patsey . . . by sale or death or any other manner . . . seemed to be [her] ruling thought and passion.” Humiliated wives had little legal recourse, however, since divorce was nearly impossible, and South Carolina banned it entirely. --- # NONSLAVEHOLDERS AND POOR WHITES Though slaveholders controlled a disproportionate share of the South’s wealth, the majority of southern households owned no slaves but enough land and equipment to live in simple comfort. Yeomen and artisans might resent the planters’ airs but did not quarrel with the fundamental institutions of their society. Even the “poor whites,” who owned little or no property, and whose standards of food, clothing, and shelter were often little better than those of slaves, usually accepted the privileges of race without questioning slavery. The effects of bondage could protect nonslaveholders, for underdeveloped transportation and marketing networks shielded yeomen from competition and cushioned artisans from some of the pressures that sent many northerners into wage-paying jobs with lower status, skills, and income. For the same reason, wives and daughters on small farms continued to support the family’s independence with home manufactures long after most northern women had laid aside their looms and spinning wheels. Even in cotton-growing areas, nonslaveholding farmers grew significantly smaller crops of cotton and larger crops of corn than pure business logic would dictate, indicating that safety-first farming still ruled the economic strategies of yeomen. To the extent that slaveholders were concentrated in the lowland parts of the South and nonslaveholders in the up-country, social and political rivalry spawned intrastate sectional rivalries, with up-country and low country legislators battling over banks, internal improvements, taxes, and legislative apportionment. Expressing equal measures of racial and class resentment, a North Carolina mountaineer bluntly explained to Frederick Law Olmsted that slavery gave planters too much power. > “People out here hates the Eastern people,” he confided. “They vote on the slave basis, and there’s some of them nigger counties where there ain’t more’n four or five hundred white folks, that has just as much power in the Legislature any of our mountain counties where there’ll be some thousand voters.” Given the obvious class tensions of southern white society, historians have often wondered about the support for slavery among white nonslaveholders. For the most part, yeomen supported the system even if they resented the inequality it created. Many nonslaveholders hoped to own slaves themselves someday. Sharing the racism that made slavery possible, most southern whites feared an onslaught of black violence if slavery ended. Finally, white nonslaveholders prob- --- ably sensed that slavery protected their own independence. Looking north, they could see a free labor society where more and more men like themselves were becoming dependent wage earners, and they did not like what they saw. ## FREE PEOPLE OF COLOR Not all free southerners were white. Most numerous in the Upper South, “free people of color” usually descended from mixed-race couples of the early colonial-era, the children of masters and slaves, slaves who purchased their freedom, and a lucky few liberated by Revolutionary idealists. Some combined black, white, and Indian heritage. To preserve a strict barrier between the races, most state legislatures set the proportion of black ancestry that barred free people of color from the privileges of whiteness at one-sixteenth or less and made no legal distinction between blacks and mulattoes. Beginning in the 1830s, the federal government forced most Indian tribes west beyond the Mississippi, but a few scattered communities of Native Americans remained in isolated corners of the South, mostly without tribal lands or governments, and state laws often classified them as free people of color as well. Free blacks were anomalous in a society where all African Americans were presumed to be slaves and only whites were presumed to be free. Most legislatures eventually regretted the relaxed manumission laws of the late eighteenth century and took steps to reduce or tightly control the free black population. In 1806, Virginia gave all newly emancipated blacks 12 months to leave the state or return to slavery. Other states passed similar laws and limited manumission powers to the courts or the legislature itself. These measures limited the growth of the free black population, but the 1860 census still counted over a quarter million free people of color in the slave states and the District of Columbia, approximately 2 percent of the total population. Lawmakers adopted a complex web of restrictions to control free blacks and prevent them from leading slaves in a challenge to the racial order. State laws barred them from voting, bearing arms, serving on juries or in the militia, testifying against white people, and preaching or holding meetings without white supervision. County courts routinely apprenticed free black children without their parents’ consent. State laws discouraged free blacks from fraternizing with slaves and imposed harsher penalties on blacks than on whites for the same of- --- fenses or banned certain acts for blacks but not for whites. Most slave states made it illegal for a free person of color to speak or act disrespectfully to a white person, for example. Most free blacks lived in the southern countryside, but a disproportionate number gravitated to towns and cities. The most successful became skilled artisans and shopkeepers, like North Carolina cabinetmaker Thomas Day or Natchez barber William Johnson. Some white fathers, especially in French-speaking Louisiana, lavished property and education on their mixed-race children, but racial discrimination kept most in casual day labor, domestic service, and other menial occupations. A handful of free blacks owned slaves themselves. In most of these cases, a free person had purchased his or her spouse or children and held them as slaves because manumission was impossible. Other free blacks bought slaves for straightforward economic purposes. Despite their disadvantages, free blacks tried to take full advantage of their few liberties to create community institutions such as churches or benevolent societies. ## Slavery and Culture White Americans of the North and South shared many common convictions. Slaveholding southerners like Thomas Jefferson and James Madison had composed many of the nation’s founding documents and articulated Revolutionary ideals for all Americans. With significant variations, the evangelical religion that stoked the North’s First Great Awakening spread into the South, where it evolved, gained energy, and moved north again in the Second Great Awakening. Despite these core similarities, northern and southern societies embraced diverging ideals in the antebellum period. In some cases, as in convictions about race, the difference was mainly a matter of emphasis and intensity. In others, as in their ideas on social reform and human liberty, southern intellectuals differed profoundly from their northern counterparts. Both kinds of differences converged as southern leaders constructed a defense of slave society to rebut abolitionist criticism. Especially after the 1820s, southern writers and thinkers worked to prove that a society based on slavery was in every way superior to a society based on free labor. ### RACE Eighteenth-century intellectuals agreed that blacks and whites were all descended from Adam and Eve, and attributed racial differences --- to environmental factors like tropical weather. Despite this reasoning, most whites took racial inequality for granted and did not try to explain it. Stung by abolitionist attacks, however, southerners of the 1820s and 1830s developed elaborate justifications for slavery, arguing that blacks were inherently different from and inferior to whites, that slavery was blacks’ God-given destiny, and that they were better off in slavery than freedom. Despite banning slavery itself, many northern whites adopted similar views and used them to defend discrimination. As he did in so many other areas, Thomas Jefferson led the way to new ideas about race. “I advance it as a suspicion only,” he observed in his *Notes on the State of Virginia*, written and published in the 1780s, “that the blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time and circumstance, are inferior to the whites in the endowments of body and mind.” Jefferson always disapproved of slavery, and in his last public letter, written in 1826, he still insisted that “the mass of mankind has not been born with saddles on their backs, nor a favored few booted and spurred, ready to ride them legitimately, by the grace of God.” Even so, he did not believe that the two races could live equally and peacefully in the same country, and refused to publicize his anti-slavery views until more whites shared them and a way appeared for blacks to leave America. Later southerners were less reticent and defended slavery on plainly racist grounds. In 1835, Governor George McDuffie shared an increasingly popular consensus with South Carolina’s legislature. “The African negro is destined by Providence to . . . servile dependence,” he proclaimed. “It is marked on the face, stamped on the skin, and evinced by the intellectual inferiority and natural improvidence of his race.” Blacks were brutal and savage when left alone or incited by others, he went on, but under slavery, they “are cheerful, contented and happy much beyond the general condition of the human race.” South Carolina’s Senator John C. Calhoun firmly agreed, and told his colleagues in 1837 that “never before has the black race of central Africa . . . attained a condition so civilized and so improved” as under slavery. A few scholars formed elaborate theories of race based on physical differences, developing a now-discredited school of thought known as “scientific racism.” University of Pennsylvania professor Samuel G. Morton measured hundreds of human skulls, and declared in his 1839 book *Crania Americana* that whites, Indians, and blacks could be ranked by their brain sizes, with whites having the largest brains and greatest intelligence and blacks having the smallest and the least. The --- races were so different, he concluded, that God must have created them as separate species. Alabama physician Josiah Nott and Egyptologist George Gliddon admired Morton’s work and elaborated on his theory of “polygenesis,” or separate creation, in their 1854 work *Types of Mankind*. Some southern intellectuals embraced scientific racism as a justification of slavery, but ministers rejected it as unscriptural and taught instead that God had cursed Noah’s son Ham, supposedly the ancestor of all Africans, and condemned his descendants to racial inferiority and perpetual servitude. Scientific racism gained wider currency in the later nineteenth century, however, and was widely used to justify racial discrimination and white domination of other races. Racial prejudice was also widespread in the North. Most Revolutionary-era constitutions reserved political privileges for white men, not simply freemen. When blacks did win their freedom, they were rigorously barred from public facilities like steamboats and stagecoaches. Racial segregation in housing, work, schools, and public accommodations was common in the North, and some midwestern states joined Missouri in passing laws to prevent free black people from entering the state at all. Many northerners sincerely rejected slavery, but others could tolerate it when it stayed far away and blacks did not compete with whites. ## RELIGION Colonial southerners had neglected their established churches, but the First Great Awakening introduced them to evangelical fervor. By 1790, about a fourth of white southerners and 3 percent of blacks had joined churches, especially evangelical congregations of Baptists, Methodists, and Presbyterians. A few gentry families clung to the forms of the Church of England and founded the Protestant Episcopal Church as the American branch of Anglicanism. This core group of believers prepared the way for an enthusiastic plunge into the Second Great Awakening. Late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century southern evangelicals often condemned slavery. They called it a “horrid evil” and “contrary to the laws of God, man, and nature,” though they gave blacks separate seats and inferior roles within their churches. In 1784, Methodists made plans to excommunicate all members who had not freed their slaves within the next two years. Presbyterians asked for slavery’s “final abolition” in 1787, and Baptists in 1789 called slavery “a violent --- deprivation of the rights of nature and inconsistent with republican government." These professions gradually faded. Methodists could not enforce their proposed exclusion and other denominations did not try. Slaveholders decided that Christian slaves made better workers, and welcomed their conversion if ministers dropped their criticisms. Slaveholding women listened carefully to the gospel message and labored like northern women to convert their worldly sons and husbands. When they succeeded, evangelical planters made doubly sure that ministers left slavery alone. While northern evangelists stressed individual freedom and tried to implant an inner moral compass so their converts could guide themselves, southern ministers increasingly stressed the benefits of social rank, order, and control. All were equal before God, admitted the *Southern Presbyterian Review*, but not in this world. "If a man is justly and providentially a ruler," it continued, "he has the rights of a father; and if a slave, only the rights of a slave." Quoting Saint Paul, southern ministers also reminded potential dissidents that God commanded servants to obey their masters just as he ordered wives to submit to their husbands and children to their parents. Like all human institutions, slavery was not perfect, but if men rejected all God-given institutions for mere imperfection, civilization itself would collapse. Masters and slaves could both be sinners, but if both accepted their Christian duties, slavery could be a blessing as much as marriage or parenthood. Beginning as critics of slavery and inequality, the southern evangelical churches eventually embraced them. Divergence between northern and southern churches was painfully apparent by the 1840s. Pointing to general biblical principles like "love thy neighbor as thyself," northern churches increasingly denounced slavery as sinful and unchristian, but southerners rejected such abstractions. "If ‘do unto others as you would they should do unto you’ is to abolish slavery," argued Virginia Baptist minister Thornton Stringfellow in 1841, "it will, for the same reason, level all inequalities in human condition." Relying on "strict construction" in biblical as well as constitutional interpretation, he and other southern ministers claimed to follow the literal word of God while northerners worshiped fallible human reason and the vain pursuit of heaven on earth. Rupture finally came in 1845, when the Methodist and Baptist denominations both split over northern efforts to brand slaveholding as an unacceptable sin for ministers. Presbyterians had already split into --- Old School and New School segments in 1837 over other theological issues. Most southern Presbyterians had sided with the Old School because of its more conservative position on all issues relating to human reform, including abolition of slavery. Differences over secular reforms paralleled disputes over theology. Throughout the antebellum period, southern churches strictly punished members for sins like drunkenness, profanity, Sabbath-breaking, and sexual immorality, but hesitated to endorse projects of wider social improvement. Some southerners eventually accepted the temperance crusade, but no antebellum southern state passed a "Maine Law" to ban alcohol entirely. Southern legislatures were slower than northern ones to build common schools, mental hospitals, asylums for the deaf and blind, and reformed penitentiaries, though all these measures met some success in the 1850s. Reforms that seemed to challenge the principles of social hierarchy, especially abolitionism, women's rights, and utopian communities, were either illegal or highly unpopular in the southern states. ### EQUALITY AND INEQUALITY White southerners faced an awkward contradiction between republican ideals of equality and the unequal realities of slave society. A few simply rejected white equality. Others claimed that slavery gave white men more equality than free society did. All agreed that slave society was vastly superior to its northern rival. Some states retained property requirements on the rights to vote and hold office for some years after independence, but in both sections, most states abandoned them in the early nineteenth century and only used race and sex to separate political equals from inferiors. Georgia dropped its property requirement for the suffrage in 1789, followed by Maryland in 1801, and South Carolina in 1810. The newer states of the trans-Appalachian South dispensed with such restrictions from the beginning. On the whole, antebellum voters in both sections participated much more actively in elections than modern citizens, and ballot restrictions had less impact on participation rates than overall interest in a given election. Only 26.5 percent of adult white males cast ballots in the muddled presidential canvass of 1824, and southern rates ranged from 11.5 percent in Virginia to 53.7 percent in Maryland. In the hotly contested campaign of 1840, hosts of professional and volunteer organizers drummed up every possible vote, and the national participation --- rate hit 78 percent of adult white men. Southern rates were similar, ranging from 39.4 percent in Louisiana to 89.6 percent in Tennessee. Stiff property requirements always limited participation in Virginia, but participation still hit 54.6 percent in 1840. Legislative representation had close links to voting rights. The earliest state constitutions gave extra legislative seats to plantation counties, just as the three-fifths compromise gave the South more representatives in Congress. In Virginia, for example, each county elected two representatives to the House of