as Spain used American silver to wage war and exert influence throughout Europe. Their concern only deepened after 1580, when Spain briefly --- took over Portugal, uniting both world empires under a single sovereign. As the Iberian kingdoms grew stronger, their rivals hungered to break their imperial monopolies. These new participants dramatically increased the pace and complexity of the seventeenth-century Atlantic world. They generally began with their own trading companies and voyages, went on to raid Spanish commerce, and finally sought colonies of their own. A few examples can illustrate the intensity and complexity of what happened. In 1580, Francis Drake became the first English mariner to sail around the world, and he gave captured Spanish treasure to Queen Elizabeth that exceeded the value of her total annual income. Seeking a base to replicate this feat, England tried to colonize Virginia between 1584 and 1587, but did not begin to succeed until the founding of Jamestown in 1607. France put its first permanent settlement on the St. Lawrence River in 1600, while the Netherlands chartered the Dutch East India Company in 1602 to capture the spice trade from Portugal. A year after Jamestown, Samuel de Champlain pushed higher up the St. Lawrence to found Quebec City, future anchor of the fur-trading empire of New France. A year after that, Henry Hudson, an English captain serving the Dutch, stumbled on the river that still bears his name while searching vainly for the Northwest Passage. Calling the surrounding territory New Netherland, the Dutch launched their own fur-trading empire with a post at Albany in 1617. Still searching for the Northwest Passage, this time for England, Henry Hudson sailed into Hudson’s Bay in 1610, staking England’s claim for its own share of the fur trade. Native American hunters supplied the French, Dutch, and English with the pelts they purchased, and Native Americans replaced their stone technology with the metal tools they took in exchange. Colonization became so popular that even the distant Swedes and Danes got involved by founding New Sweden on the Delaware River south of New Netherland, a Danish sugar colony on St. Thomas in the modern Virgin Islands, and slave-trading companies in both nations. Soon after the founding of Albany, moreover, English religious dissidents (whom later Americans called the Pilgrims) left their Dutch refuge to start a very different colony in New England, not far from New Netherland. As they did so, the Netherlands gave a monopoly on its African and American trade to a new venture, the Dutch West India Company. In 1628, the company scored its greatest coup by capturing the entire Spanish treasure fleet. Besides running New Nether- --- land, moreover, the company quickly moved on Portuguese Brazil and managed to hold it for three decades. By 1640, it was exporting sugar technology to Barbados, a Caribbean island claimed by the English in 1627. Led by Barbados, England’s Caribbean sugar islands were the world’s largest sources of sugar by 1700 and the biggest destination for the African slave trade. The islands could not supply themselves with food or fuel, however, but nourished another commercial empire by importing those items from English North America, on ships sailing from New England. The colonies that became the United States grew directly from this dizzying network of Atlantic relationships. # REFORMATION AND EMPIRE Economic rivalries fed Atlantic expansion, but religious rivalries were also crucial to the motives of kings and settlers alike. Many Europeans had worried that the Roman Catholic Church had become worldly and corrupt, and they joined a sweeping movement to reform and purify it that became known as the Protestant Reformation. In 1517, two years before Cortés invaded Mexico, German monk Martin Luther publicly denounced church abuses and the theological reasoning used to defend them. In place of outward practices like church rites, the veneration of saints, or the bestowal of spiritual promises in exchange for gifts of money, which all reinforced the institutional power of the church and could become moneymaking schemes, Luther insisted that the Bible was the only source of Christian truth and that salvation came only from sincere personal faith. These ideas put private conscience and personal interpretations of scripture ahead of church traditions and authority. Luther’s followers also replaced the Latin Mass with services and Bible readings in the worshippers’ own languages and allowed their clergy to marry. To loyal Catholics, these changes spelled moral chaos and heresy, or gross violation of religious truth, but Luther’s followers found them liberating and consoling, and called themselves Protestants to emphasize their protest against Catholicism. The Swiss theologian John Calvin took Luther’s ideas several steps further. With fierce and unbending logic, Calvin concluded that an all-powerful and all-knowing God must have planned, or “predestined,” the salvation or damnation of every human being in advance, even before the creation of the world. Calvin also taught the “innate depravity,” or fundamental wickedness, of all humanity, stemming from the disobedience of Adam and Eve. Everyone deserved eternal damna --- tion in this view, but God showed mercy to his chosen few and no one could influence His decision. Paradoxically, perhaps, belief in predestination did not discourage Calvinists from seeking salvation. Instead, they lashed their consciences over every hint of sin or worldly frivolity and fervently prayed for God’s guidance. Spiritual improvement might be a comforting sign that God had chosen them for salvation. Rejecting every church practice they could not find in the Bible, Calvinists called for simple worship services centered on Bible reading, preaching, and prayer, and some abandoned all forms of church government beyond the individual congregation. Calvin’s demanding faith took deep root in English America, where a search for different versions of religious and moral perfection would be a recurrent cultural theme from the seventeenth century to the twenty-first. Protestantism spread widely in northern Europe, where resentment of Rome ran deep, but long campaigns against Jews and Muslims left Spain staunchly Catholic. England’s King Henry VIII resisted the Reformation at first, but when his Spanish wife did not bear a son, Henry alienated Spain by asking the pope to annul their marriage. When the pope refused, Henry rejected Rome’s authority and obtained his divorce from a cooperative archbishop of Canterbury. Henry wanted no radical changes in doctrine or theology, but Protestant ideas spread quickly after his death. Divorce, however, did not bring the healthy son the king had wanted. Henry VIII famously married six wives, but his only son did not survive him long. Political and religious instability roiled England until Henry’s daughter Queen Elizabeth I began a long reign that lasted from 1558 to 1603. With the monarch as its earthly head, the Church of England (or Anglican Church) adopted a conservative form of Protestantism while retaining Catholic rituals, vestments, and holy days, as well as governance by bishops and archbishops serving under the monarch. Queen Elizabeth won deep love and extravagant praise from her subjects as she guided them successfully through political and military perils. When she came to power, England was a tiny realm on the fringes of Europe, with no more than 3.5 million people—perhaps no more than one-fifth as many subjects as the Aztec emperor Montezuma. Under her leadership, England grew dramatically in economic and military power, and its population rose, reaching 5 million by 1680. Spain had used its American wealth to finance wars against Protestantism, but the English fought back with a deep conviction that the Almighty favored their nation, their church, and their queen. “God is --- English," proclaimed one Elizabethan preacher, and few in his audience seemed shocked by the assertion. Like other English monarchs, Elizabeth shared power with Parliament, a legislature that included the House of Lords for nobles and bishops and the House of Commons for members chosen by townsmen and rural landowners. The English Parliament gained strength in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and new laws and new taxes could not be imposed without its consent. Elizabeth dealt tactfully with the lawmakers, but the next two kings, James I and his son Charles I, were less accommodating. In the 1640s, parliamentary forces overthrew Charles I and put him to death. Establishing the principles of representative government and parliamentary supremacy coincided with the founding of England’s overseas empire, with central importance for American history. ### THE PRICE REVOLUTION AND ITS CONSEQUENCES Atlantic empires changed the European economy in ways that made colonization seem more important and more affordable to its rivals. Spain spent its American silver on manufactured goods from other countries, including English woolens. The influx of silver caused inflation, and English consumer prices rose more than fivefold in the sixteenth century. A similar pattern prevailed in most of Europe, leading to what historians have called the price revolution. Wool producers and other exporters benefited from rising prices, but wages usually failed to keep pace with inflation, so laborers and artisans suffered accordingly. Inflation hit rural areas the hardest. Noblemen and a group of wealthy commoners known as the gentry owned most of England’s farmland and rented it to peasant cultivators under long leases and fixed rents. Their real incomes shrank as prices climbed, so innovative gentry tried to repair their fortunes with alternatives to traditional agriculture. The most popular measure was to enter the booming wool market by evicting tenants, consolidating their tiny plots, and enclosing these larger tracts with fences or hedges to make sheep pastures. Victims of enclosure could toil as day laborers, work in the woolen industry, or turn to beggary and crime. Contemporaries may have exaggerated, but earnest observers worried that enclosure brought private benefits and social catastrophe. > “The people . . . doe swarme in the land, as yong bees in a hive in June,” warned one. “The mightier like --- strong old bees thrust the weaker, as younger, out of their hives: Lords of Manors convert towneships, in which were a hundred or two hundred [church] communicants, to a shepheard and his dog." While wandering laborers and improving landlords transformed the countryside, merchants and manufacturers grew rich from trading cloth and other finished goods and looked for new ventures to reinvest their profits. The price revolution thus elevated a group of men with money to spend on colonies, and uprooted others who lacked prospects at home, who were used to moving around already, and who might be willing to try their luck in America. Religious and political rivalry inspired some Englishmen to break Spain’s monopoly of empire, and new wealth gave them means to do so. If American treasure financed war against Protestants, they reasoned, the Almighty would surely bless a counterattack. In 1562, a Plymouth mariner named John Hawkins seized a cargo of African slaves and sold them in the Spanish Caribbean in defiance of Spain’s monopoly. In 1573, Hawkins’s associate Francis Drake captured an enormous shipment of Peruvian gold as it crossed the Isthmus of Panama. A later raid made him the first Englishman to sail around the world, as he robbed Spanish fleets in the Pacific and kept heading west. Spain denounced Hawkins and Drake as pirates, but Elizabeth knighted them both and the nation acclaimed them as heroes. The exploits of Hawkins and Drake fired the imagination of English writers and scholars who began to ask why England should not colonize America directly. Richard Hakluyt, an English clergyman and diplomat, collected stories of past English voyages and arguments for western settlement. Somewhere in America, he reasoned, there had to be a northwest passage leading safely to the Orient; the Spanish could not have found all the gold and silver in America, and there must be plenty left over for the English; American naval bases would enable English ships to attack the annual Spanish treasure fleets as they followed the Gulf Stream north and east across the Atlantic; and finally, he predicted, the Indians would remember Spanish cruelties, join the kindly English to oppose them, and embrace Christianity in the bargain. # The Enterprise of Virginia Wishful thinking inspired all these arguments, but they were persuasive enough to carry English colonists to Virginia. Poor planning and --- unrealistic expectations undermined their efforts, and England’s first attempted settlement on Roanoke Island in modern North Carolina vanished entirely. The Jamestown colony on Chesapeake Bay nearly failed too, as its colonists lived like soldiers, neglected agriculture, antagonized the Indians, and focused on a fruitless search for gold. Virginia would not flourish until its settlers abandoned their initial goals and established private farms, added women and families, and began to feed Europe’s new appetite for smoking tobacco. ## ROANOKE AND JAMESTOWN Hakluyt caught the attention of Walter Raleigh, a renowned soldier and favorite courtier of Queen Elizabeth. In 1584, the queen gave Raleigh permission to search for new lands and claim them for England. Later that year, his first exploring party reached Roanoke Island and reported that the natives were friendly and harmless, and the soil and climate were delightful. Collecting his own knighthood, Raleigh named the area Virginia in honor of his unmarried “Virgin Queen.” The next year, Raleigh’s second expedition tried to found a permanent base. Commander Ralph Lane’s men mapped the area and located Chesapeake Bay to the north while artist John White made sensitive sketches of the native inhabitants. Despite these advances, Lane antagonized the Indians with endless demands for food and by murdering their chief at a supposed peace conference. When Sir Francis Drake visited the colony in the early summer of 1586, the besieged survivors accepted his offer to bring them home, and the colony ended in failure. Undaunted, Raleigh sent John White back to Virginia in 1587 with a shipload of men, women, and children. They first intended to settle on Chesapeake Bay, but later decided to reoccupy Lane’s old fort on Roanoke. Soon after their arrival, White’s daughter, Elizabeth Dare, gave birth to a girl, Virginia Dare, the first English child born in America. Without much pause, Governor White then returned to England for more supplies, but while he was there, King Philip II of Spain dispatched an enormous fleet, or armada, to invade England, dethrone Elizabeth, and reclaim her realm for Catholicism. Drake and Hawkins led in England’s defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588, but the emergency delayed White’s return for two more years. When he finally arrived, his colonists had vanished, and the fate of the “Lost Colony” remains a mystery to this day. --- After the fiasco at Roanoke, Raleigh lost favor at court and abandoned his efforts to settle Virginia. Queen Elizabeth died in 1603 and her cousin James Stuart, who ruled Scotland as King James VI, succeeded her as King James I of England. Within a year, James had made peace with Spain, and a group of London investors had decided to try again in Virginia, hoping to find profits there without challenging Spain. In 1606, they organized the Virginia Company, a joint-stock company which sold shares to investors who expected to split its profits through dividends, much like a modern corporation. On an early April morning of 1607, their three tiny ships entered Chesapeake Bay. The expedition consisted of 104 men and boys, most of whom were gentlemen who expected to share in the honor, glory, and wealth of the new colony, but not in its manual labor. Others were personal servants, and some were technical experts who could identify the gold and jewels that everyone expected to find. Only a handful had more practical skills and none was a farmer or gardener. When the leaders opened their locked chest of instructions, they were chagrinned to find that their seven-member governing council included Captain John Smith, a cocksure young adventurer of humble birth who lacked due respect for his superiors. Submitting to Smith’s elevation as best they could, the council elected Edward Maria Wingfield as governor and considered where to settle. They found that Chesapeake Bay penetrated a heavily forested plain that sluggish streams and estuaries had cut into alternating bands of land and water. They called the largest of these the James River after their king and followed it upstream for 60 miles. One enthusiastic colonist later reported that the banks were sprinkled with “faire meddowes and goodly tall Trees, with such Fresh-Waters . . . as I was almost ravished at the first sight thereof.” Finally finding an easily defensible promontory with a safe, deepwater anchorage on May 13, 1607, the exhausted men disembarked, named the place Jamestown, and set about making a fort. ### SURVIVING IN POWHATAN’S VIRGINIA The newcomers had unwittingly entered the territory of a confederacy of some 30 small Indian tribes from the Algonquian language group who shared the name or title of their supreme chief, or “emperor,” Powhatan. Partly by inheritance and partly by force, the aging Powha- --- tan had brought them together while still a young man and installed subsidiary chiefs, or *werowances* (mostly male but some female), to guide each tribe and village within the group. Like the related tribes who had sparred with the Roanoke colonists, the Powhatans grew corn, beans, and squash, lived in bark-covered houses, and hunted game and seafood with stone-tipped arrows. The Powhatans already knew about Europeans, for explorers’ vessels had occasionally entered the Chesapeake for several decades. The emperor’s kinsman and ultimate successor Opechancanough may have been “Don Luis,” the youth whom Spanish missionaries had sent to Spain in 1570, but who returned and helped kill them in 1571. Powhatan may also have met survivors from the Roanoke expedition, for he later reported that white people had once lived near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay but died in an intertribal war. He knew the bearded, pale-skinned newcomers could be dangerous, but he also knew they brought valuable trade goods. After several initial skirmishes, the English and the Powhatans settled into a wary truce, occasionally punctuated by murders and violence on either side. Each group wisely distrusted the other but resolved to make use of their antagonists. As Powhatan himself later explained to John Smith, > “[I]t is better to eate good meate, lie well, and sleep quietly with my women & children, laugh and be merrie with you, have copper, hatchets, or what I want, being your friend: then bee forced to flie from al[l], to lie cold in the woods, feed upon acorns, roots, and such trash, and so be hunted by you, that I can neither rest, eat nor sleepe.” Not surprisingly, the English first needed the Indians more than the reverse. They did not bring enough food and the river’s feeble currents did not flush away their wastes. The leaders quarreled endlessly and the gentlemen would not work. As servants of the Virginia Company, the colonists expected their employer to feed them. Failing that, they might live off the local population like soldiers in enemy territory, but severe drought had left the Powhatans with little to spare. Hungry and wracked by intestinal diseases, only 38 of the original 104 Englishmen were still alive at the end of January 1608. These were the circumstances when John Smith went looking for food and fell captive to Powhatan. He may never have grasped the meaning of his “rescue” by Pocahontas, but Smith certainly realized that English lives depended on those they called “Salvages.” Combining threats with barter, he obtained enough corn from the Powhatans to keep his company alive. As other leaders died or departed, Smith --- took command and minimized casualties with his famous rule that “he that shall not worke, shall not eate.” Smith’s blunt speech and stringent methods never endeared him to others, however, and a serious injury forced him back to England in 1609. John Smith never returned to Virginia, though he later explored the northern coasts of America, named them New England, and continued to promote American colonization. Smith’s departure was followed by the “starving times.” Over the winter of 1609–1610, Jamestown’s population plunged from five hundred to sixty, as Powhatan refused assistance and the frantic colonists ate dogs, rats, roots, and (in at least one grisly case) even one another in a desperate struggle to stay alive. When a new governor landed in May of 1610, he decided the situation was hopeless and ordered everyone into his boats for a return to England. Just as they were passing the mouth of the James, however, the starving colonists met three supply ships laden with provisions, and returned to Jamestown for another effort. Virginia barely flickered back to life. The countryside seemed devoid of profitable exports, and supplies from home were never reliable. Arriving in 1611, Deputy Governor Sir Thomas Dale attempted to whip the demoralized colonists into shape with a severe legal code, the “Lawes Divine, Morall and Martiall,” that imposed the death penalty for crimes ranging from disobedience and desertion to sex offenses and robbing gardens. As in John Smith’s day, everyone was required to work and the colonists attempted to grow their own food, but they did not stop raiding the Indians. The result was a bitter war of attrition with the Powhatans that did not abate until 1613, when the settlers captured Pocahontas and held her hostage. Colonist John Rolfe sealed this peace by marrying Pocahontas in 1614. He took his bride and their infant son to England two years later, where she impressed the court with her noble bearing, her command of English, and her conversion to Christianity. Sadly, Pocahontas did not